Monster Spoilers for Unangband Version 0.6.3
------------------------------------------

The Filthy street urchin  (Red 't')
=== Num:1  Lev:0  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:1  Exp:0
She looks squalid and thoroughly revolting.  This woman lives in the town and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native
 depth.  She may beg to do you no effect; 1 time in 20.  She can carry a lite
 to see you, open doors and pick up objects.  She needs lite to see you.  She
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 40 feet.  She
 usually appears in groups.  She can beg to do you no effect and touch to steal
gold from you.  

The Scrawny cat  (Light Umber 'f')
=== Num:2  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:0
A skinny little furball with sharp claws and a menacing look.  This animal
 lives in the town and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening
 at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 over land, but not through water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 300 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d1 damage.  

The Scruffy little dog  (Mud 'C')
=== Num:3  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:1  Exp:0
A thin flea-ridden mutt, growling as you get close.  This animal lives in the
 town and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its
 native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d1 damage.  

[U] Farmer Maggot  (Light Slate 'h')
=== Num:4  Lev:0  Rar:6  Spd:+0  Hp:120  Ac:10  Exp:0
He's lost his dogs.  He's had his mushrooms stolen.  He's not a happy hobbit!  
 This creature lives in the town and moves at normal speed about town on
 business.  Killing this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He may moan to do you no effect
 ; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors and bash down doors.  He lights up the
 surroundings.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is very observant
 of intruders, which he may notice from 400 feet.  He may carry a good weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, lite, written item, potion or edible
 item.  He can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage and moan to do you no effect.  It
 is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Blubbering idiot  (White 't')
=== Num:5  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:0
She tends to blubber a lot.  This woman lives in the town and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for
 a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her native depth.  She can 
 pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which she may notice from 60 feet.  She can drool to do you no
 effect.  

The Boil-covered wretch|||es|  (Mud 't')
=== Num:6  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:0
Ugly doesn't begin to describe her.  This woman lives in the town and moves a
 bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her native depth.  She
 can open doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.  
 She is ever vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from 60 feet.  She
 can drool to do you no effect.  

The Village idiot  (Light Dark 't')
=== Num:7  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:10  Ac:1  Exp:0
Drooling and comical, but then, what do you expect?  This woman lives in the
 town and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her
 native depth.  She can pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.
She is ever vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from 60 feet.  She can 
 drool to do you no effect.  

The Pitiful-looking beggar  (Light Teal 't')
=== Num:8  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:1  Exp:0
You just can't help feeling sorry for her.  This woman lives in the town and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her native
 depth.  She may beg to do you no effect; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors and 
 pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which she may notice from 100 feet.  She can beg to do
you no effect.  

The Mangy-looking leper  (Green 't')
=== Num:9  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:0
You feel it isn't safe to touch her.  This woman lives in the town and moves a
 bit erratically and slowly.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for
 a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her native depth.  She may 
 beg to do you no effect; 1 time in 10.  She can open doors and pick up objects
 .  She always carries a lite to see you.  She tends to overlook intruders,
 which she may notice from 100 feet.  She can beg to do you no effect and touch
to infect you with disease.  

The Squint-eyed rogue  (Light Red 't')
=== Num:10  Lev:0  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:8  Exp:0
A hardy, street-wise crook that knows an easy catch when she sees one.  This
 evil woman thief lives in the town and moves at normal speed about town on
 business.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may insult to do you 
 no effect; 1 time in 5.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash
 down doors, pick up objects and hide in unusual places.  She needs lite to see
 you.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which she may notice from
 100 feet.  She may carry a weapon, garment, tool, lite, adornment, musical item
 , potion or edible item.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage, touch to 
 steal items from you and insult to do you no effect.  

The Singing, happy drunk  (Blue 't')
=== Num:11  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:1  Exp:0
She makes you glad to be sober.  This woman lives in the town and moves
 somewhat erratically at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is not
 threatening at her native depth.  She may beg to do you no effect; 1 time in 10
 .  She can open doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see
 you.  She is ever vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from 100 feet.  
 She may carry a treasure.  She can beg to do you no effect and vomit to do you
no effect.  

The Aimless-looking merchant  (Purple 't')
=== Num:12  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:1  Exp:0
The typical strumpet around town, with purse jingling, and looking for more
 amulets of adornment to buy.  This woman lives in the town and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her
 native depth.  She can open doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a
 lite to see you.  She prefers to ignore intruders, which she may notice from
 100 feet.  She usually appears with a friend.  She may carry a treasure.  She
 can hit to do you no effect.  

The Mean-looking mercenar|y|y|ies|  (Light Umber 't')
=== Num:13  Lev:0  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:20  Exp:0
No job is too low for her.  This evil woman warrior lives in the town and moves
 at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a
 lite to see you.  She prefers to ignore intruders, which she may notice from
 100 feet.  She may carry a weapon, garment, tool, lite, adornment, musical item
 , potion or edible item.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Battle-scarred veteran  (Orange 't')
=== Num:14  Lev:0  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:30  Ac:30  Exp:0
She doesn't take to strangers kindly.  This woman warrior lives in the town and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She prefers to ignore
 intruders, which she may notice from 100 feet.  She may carry a weapon, 
 garment, tool, lite, adornment, musical item, potion or edible item.  She can 
 hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Busy-looking merchant  (Light Purple 't')
=== Num:243  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:1  Exp:0
The typical strumpet around town, with purse jingling, and looking for more
 amulets of adornment to buy.  This woman lives in the town and moves at normal
 speed about town on business.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her native depth.  She
 can open doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.  
 She is ever vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from 1000 feet.  She
 usually appears with a friend.  She may carry a treasure.  She can hit to do 
 you no effect.  

[U] Your Familiar  (Violet '@')
=== Num:329  Lev:0  Rar:0  Spd:+5  Hp:5  Ac:40  Exp:0
Your familiar serves you as a faithful pet.  This creature lives in the town
 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can easily evade blows
 and missiles.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It has no
 physical attacks.  

[U] Your Familiar  (Violet '@')
=== Num:330  Lev:0  Rar:0  Spd:+5  Hp:5  Ac:40  Exp:0
Your familiar serves you as a faithful pet.  This creature lives in the town
 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can easily evade blows
 and missiles.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It has no
 physical attacks.  

[U] Harry Goatleaf, Gatekeeper of Bree  (Mustard 't')
=== Num:617  Lev:0  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:343  Ac:10  Exp:0
The suspicious and gruff keeper of the West-gate of Bree.  He betrayed his
 people by letting Saruman's thugs into the city.  This man lives in the town
 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 0.00 points for a
 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He may gaze to do 
 you no effect or insult to do you no effect; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors
 and bash down doors.  He always carries a lite to see you.  He is very
 observant of intruders, which he may notice from 400 feet.  He may carry a
 good weapon, garment, tool, lite, adornment, musical item, potion or edible
 item.  He can gaze to do you no effect and insult to do you no effect.  

The Faerie light  (Light Yellow '~')
=== Num:800  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:0
A shimmering ball of light which dances around town.  This creature lives in
 the town and moves extremely erratically and quickly about town on business,
 but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native
 depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind and easily evade
 blows and missiles.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  
 It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists 
 lite.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  
 It has no physical attacks.  

The Hobbit reveller  (Blue 'h')
=== Num:871  Lev:0  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:1  Exp:0
She makes you sad to be leaving the Shire.  This creature lives in the town and
 moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native
 depth.  She may sing to do you no effect; 1 time in 10.  She can open doors
 and pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from 100 feet.  She usually
 appears in groups.  She can sing to do you no effect.  

The Hobbit merchant  (Light Blue 'h')
=== Num:872  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:1  Exp:0
The typical strumpet around town, with purse jingling, and looking for more
 amulets of adornment to buy.  This creature lives in the town and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her
 native depth.  She can open doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a
 lite to see you.  She prefers to ignore intruders, which she may notice from
 100 feet.  She may carry a treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  
 

The Hobbit veteran  (Light Umber 'h')
=== Num:873  Lev:0  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:20  Exp:0
A stalwart defender of the town.  This creature lives in the town and moves a
 bit erratically at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at
 her native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  
 She always carries a lite to see you.  She prefers to ignore intruders, which
 she may notice from 100 feet.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, 
 garment, tool, lite, written item, potion or edible item.  She can hit to hurt
you for 1d10 damage.  

The Large cockroach  (Light Dark 'I')
=== Num:901  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:0
A cockroach the size of your fist.  This insect lives in the town and moves
 extremely erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  
 It is observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can crawl to infect you with disease.  

The Bumbling priest||ess|s|  (Blue 'p')
=== Num:1018  Lev:0  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:10  Exp:0
She is bumbling and ineffectual at the best of times.  This woman priest lives
 in the town and moves a bit erratically at normal speed about town on business
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which 
 heal-self, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors.  She
 always carries a lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which
 she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, armour, garment, lite, 
 adornment, written item, potion or edible item.  She can hit to hurt you for
 1d5 damage.  

The Cross-eyed mage  (Red 'q')
=== Num:1033  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:6  Exp:0
She can't see straight, let alone cast spells straight.  This woman mage lives
 in the town and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed about town on
 business.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is not threatening at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells which blink-self or confuse; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors.
She always carries a lite to see you.  She is observant of intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, garment, lite, adornment, 
 magical device, written item, potion or edible item.  She can hit to hurt you 
 for 1d3 damage.  

The Errand |boy|girl|runners|  (Light Green 't')
=== Num:1048  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:1  Exp:0
She has no time to talk to you.  This woman lives in the town and moves at
 normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her native depth.
She can open doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a lite to see you.  
 She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 40 feet.  
 She has no physical attacks.  

The Hobbit |gentleman|good wife|good folk|  (Light Green 'h')
=== Num:1049  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:1  Exp:0
She is a merry looking woman on an errand.  This creature lives in the town and
 moves at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her
 native depth.  She can open doors.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 40 feet.  She
 has no physical attacks.  

The Wide-eyed tourist  (Yellow 't')
=== Num:1055  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:5  Exp:0
This shill seems a little out of place and down on her luck.  This woman lives
 in the town and moves a bit erratically at normal speed about town on business
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is not threatening at her native depth.  She may beg to do you no effect;
 1 time in 20.  She can open doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a
 lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice
 from 100 feet.  She may carry one or two treasures.  She can beg to do you no
 effect.  

The Innkeeper  (Light Slate 't')
=== Num:1180  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:1  Exp:0
A middle-aged woman dressed in grey and silver.  She is very busy, and doesn't
 even have time to gossip.  This woman lives in the town and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed about town on business.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is not threatening at her
 native depth.  She can open doors and pick up objects.  She is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which she may notice from 1000 feet.  She has no physical
 attacks.  

The Chicken  (White 'B')
=== Num:1245  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:+5  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:0
A barnyard chicken.  This animal lives in the town and moves extremely
 erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It must fly
 and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears with a
 friend.  It can peck to do you no effect.  

The Cow  (Orange 'Q')
=== Num:1246  Lev:0  Rar:1  Spd:-5  Hp:7  Ac:1  Exp:0
A peacefully grazing bovine.  This animal lives in the town and moves a bit
 erratically and slowly.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It can track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can 
 trample to do you no effect.  

The Goat  (White 'Q')
=== Num:1247  Lev:0  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:1  Exp:0
A bleating but harmless animal.  This animal lives in the town and moves
 somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 0.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can track you over land, but not through water.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can trample to do you no effect.  

The Agent of the black market  (Light Blue 't')
=== Num:1315  Lev:0  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:8  Exp:0
He 'finds' new wares for the Black Market. From unwary adventurers...   This
 evil man lives in the town and moves at normal speed about town on business.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 0.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 challenging at his native depth.  He may insult to do you no effect.  He can 
 carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  He
 needs lite to see you.  He pays very little attention to intruders, which he
 may notice from 100 feet.  He may carry a weapon, garment, tool, lite, 
 adornment, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  He can hit to hurt 
 you for 1d6 damage, touch to steal items from you and insult to do you no
 effect.  

The Grey mold  (Slate 'm')
=== Num:15  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:1
A small strange grey growth.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 1
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.00 point for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage and touch to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant white centipede  (White 'c')
=== Num:18  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:8  Exp:1
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 1 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1.00 point for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 70 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d1 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d1 damage.  

The White icky thing  (White 'i')
=== Num:19  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:7  Exp:1
It is a smallish, slimy, icky creature.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 1 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.00 point for a 1st
 level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It can touch to hurt you for 1d2 damage.  

The White snake  (White 'J')
=== Num:23  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:10  Ac:30  Exp:1
It is about eight feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 1
 and moves somewhat erratically and slowly, but is larger or faster deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.00 point for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 can eat bodies to regain strength.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d1 
 damage and crush to hurt you for 1d1 damage.  

The Rock lizard  (Light Umber 'R')
=== Num:28  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:4  Exp:1
It is a small lizard with a hardened hide.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 1 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 1.00 point for a 1st level character.  It
 is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d1 
 damage.  

The Jackal  (Mud 'C')
=== Num:29  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:3  Exp:1
It is a yapping snarling dog, dangerous when in a pack.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 1 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.00 point for
 a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat
 bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d1 damage.  
 

The Fruit bat  (Orange 'b')
=== Num:31  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:3  Ac:3  Exp:1
A fast-moving pest.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 1 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 1.00 point for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d1 
 damage.  

The Shrieker mushroom patch|||es|  (Light Red ',')
=== Num:32  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:3  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  It doesn't sound so nice, though...  This plant is
 normally found on dungeon level 1 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 1.00 point for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at
 its native depth.  It may shriek to do you no effect; 1 time in 4.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It may carry one or two 
 mushrooms.  It can shriek to do you no effect.  

The Blue faerie  (Light Blue 'H')
=== Num:45  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:14  Exp:1
A small winged figure surrounded by glowing blue light.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 1 and moves at normal speed, but is faster
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.00 point for a 1st
 level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which blink-self; 1 time in 10.  It can easily evade blows and
 missiles and track you over land, but not through water.  It must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  It lights up the surroundings.  It
 resists lite.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 180 feet.  It may carry a garment, adornment, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Whirlwind  (Umber '~')
=== Num:1182  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+5  Hp:6  Ac:5  Exp:1
A small cyclone that stirs up the musty dungeon air.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 1 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is 
 larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 1.00 point for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept
 or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.
It may carry a special object.  It can envelope to batter you for 1d1 damage.  

The Worker ant  (Light Slate 'a')
=== Num:30  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:3  Exp:2
A large ant with powerful mandibles.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 1 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 2.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 100 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d2 damage.  

The Brown faerie  (Light Umber 'H')
=== Num:113  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:5  Ac:18  Exp:2
It is a small winged humanoid surrounded by a glowing brown light.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 1 and moves at normal speed, but
 is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which blink-self, terrify or slow; 1 time in 7.  It
 can easily evade blows and missiles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It lights up
 the surroundings.  It resists lite.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 180 feet.  It may carry a garment, adornment, edible
 item, junk item or treasure.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Insect swarm  (Light Blue 'I')
=== Num:1317  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:3  Ac:4  Exp:2
A lone insect may be harmless, but there's a whole swarm of them here!   This
 mix of animal and insect is normally found on dungeon level 1 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 2.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It cannot be cut.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d1 
 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d1 damage.  

The Metallic green centipede  (Green 'c')
=== Num:34  Lev:1  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:10  Ac:4  Exp:4
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 1 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 4.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength
 .  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 50 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can 
 crawl to hurt you for 1d1 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d1 damage.  

The Yellow mold  (Yellow 'm')
=== Num:63  Lev:1  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:36  Ac:10  Exp:4
It is a strange yellow growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 1 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 4.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant green frog  (Green 'F')
=== Num:41  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:8  Exp:1
It is as big as a wolf.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 2 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 1.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.
It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.
It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant field |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Mustard 'r')
=== Num:1035  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:4  Exp:1
It is about three feet long with large teeth.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 2 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is not
 threatening at its native depth.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Huge brown bat  (Light Umber 'b')
=== Num:720  Lev:2  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:7  Ac:12  Exp:2
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 2
 and moves somewhat erratically and very quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 80 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d2 damage.  

The Giant green centipede  (Green 'c')
=== Num:735  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:10  Exp:2
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 2 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 2.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 70 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d2 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d2 damage.  

The Apprentice mage  (Magenta-Pink 'q')
=== Num:38  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:6  Exp:3
She is leaving behind a trail of dropped spell components.  This woman mage is
 normally found on dungeon level 2 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 3.27 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging
 at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which produce mana bolts, 
 recover mana, blink-self, blind or confuse; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors.
She always carries a lite to see you.  She is observant of intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a friend.  She may carry a
weapon, garment, lite, adornment, magical device, written item, potion, edible
 item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant black ant  (Light Dark 'a')
=== Num:42  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:20  Exp:3
It is about three feet long.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 2
 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 3.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.
It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant grey centipede  (Slate 'c')
=== Num:736  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:10  Exp:3
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 2 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 3.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 70 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d3 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant yellow centipede  (Yellow 'c')
=== Num:17  Lev:2  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:12  Exp:4
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 2 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 4.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 80 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can 
 bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Small goblin  (Yellow 'k')
=== Num:24  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:8  Ac:16  Exp:4
It is a squat and ugly humanoid figure.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is
 normally found on dungeon level 2 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 4.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at
 its native depth.  It can open doors and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, 
 garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for
 1d5 damage.  

The Giant white |louse|louse|lice|  (Light Slate 'I')
=== Num:56  Lev:2  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:3  Ac:5  Exp:4
It is six inches long.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 2 and
 moves extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 4.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It can bite to hurt
you for 1d1 damage.  

The Grey icky thing  (Slate 'i')
=== Num:84  Lev:2  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:12  Exp:4
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, nasty creature.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 2 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 4.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 140 feet.  It can touch to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Wild dog  (Light Red 'C')
=== Num:748  Lev:2  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:9  Ac:16  Exp:4
It is a snarling hungry dog, dangerous when in a pack.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 2 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 4.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It
 is observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Clear icky thing  (White 'i')
=== Num:20  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:6  Exp:1
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, blobby creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 3 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It is
 invisible.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can touch to hurt you for
 1d2 damage.  

The Giant white |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Light Slate 'r')
=== Num:21  Lev:3  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:4  Exp:1
It is about three feet long with large teeth.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 3 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for
 1d2 damage.  

The Brown mushroom patch|||es|  (Umber ',')
=== Num:647  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 3
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.18 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to reduce charisma from you for 2d2 damage and may grow
 ammunition; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may carry one or two mushrooms.  It can 
 release spores to reduce charisma from you for 2d2 damage.  

The Silver mushroom patch|||es|  (Light Slate ',')
=== Num:655  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 3
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.18 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to absorb light from you for 3d1 damage and may grow ammunition
 ; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may carry one or two 
 mushrooms.  It can release spores to absorb light from you for 3d1 damage.  

The Brown snake  (Umber 'J')
=== Num:22  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:14  Ac:35  Exp:2
It is about eight feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 3
 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger or faster deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 can eat bodies to regain strength.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage and crush to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant white ant  (White 'a')
=== Num:62  Lev:3  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:16  Exp:2
It is about two feet long and has sharp pincers.  This insect is normally found 
 on dungeon level 3 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant grub  (Light Purple 'I')
=== Num:905  Lev:3  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:6  Exp:2
It is about three feet long with large teeth and wriggles.  This insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 3 and moves somewhat erratically at normal
 speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It breeds explosively.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite
to hurt you for 1d2 damage.  

The Brown ooze  (Umber 'j')
=== Num:928  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:16  Exp:2
It's brown and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 3
 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can ooze through tiny
 cracks and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It may carry an adornment, 
 potion, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to reduce charisma from you for
 1d3 damage.  

The Cave lizard  (Blue Slate 'R')
=== Num:68  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:16  Exp:3
It is an armoured lizard with a powerful bite.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 3 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite 
 to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Spikey mushroom patch|||es|  (Deep Light Blue ',')
=== Num:126  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:20  Ac:30  Exp:3
This plant is normally found on dungeon level 3 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 3.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may create a spike to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 6.  It is not detected by telepathy.
It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage.  

The Animated limb  (Red '~')
=== Num:1304  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:17  Ac:40  Exp:3
It is a severed limb, brought back to life and scouting for its undead master.  
 This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 3 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 3.55 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It can open doors, pick up objects, 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind and easily evade blows and
 missiles.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It has no
 physical attacks.  

The Cave fish  (Blue Slate 'F')
=== Num:1319  Lev:3  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:7  Ac:16  Exp:3
It is a blind, pale white fish that moves in fits and starts.  This mix of 
 animal and insect is normally found on dungeon level 3 and moves quickly, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can climb
 on walls and ceilings.  It must swim and cannot move out of water.  It appears
 in a giant web.  It resists blindness.  It pays little attention to intruders,
 which it may notice from 80 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite 
 to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Tangleweed  (Green ';')
=== Num:1344  Lev:3  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:5  Exp:3
A mass of vegetation.  As you pass near it, it reaches out tendrils to ensnare
 you.  You can just make out skeletons of its previous victims deep within the
 thickets.   This plant is normally found on dungeon level 3 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase
 intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 3.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 50 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry
 an adornment, junk item or treasure.  It can crush to hurt you for 1d4 damage
 and hit to petrify you.  

The White jell|y|y|ies|  (White 'j')
=== Num:40  Lev:3  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:36  Ac:1  Exp:4
Its a large pile of white flesh.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 3 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 4.73 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch
to poison you for 1d2 damage.  

[U] Grip, Farmer Maggot's dog  (Light Slate 'C')
=== Num:46  Lev:3  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:24  Ac:30  Exp:16
A rather vicious dog belonging to Farmer Maggot.  It thinks you are stealing
 mushrooms.  This animal is found on dungeon level 3 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 18.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land,
 but not through water.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It may carry up to 3 mushrooms.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage.  

[U] Fang, Farmer Maggot's dog  (Light Slate 'C')
=== Num:47  Lev:3  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:24  Ac:30  Exp:16
A rather vicious dog belonging to Farmer Maggot.  It thinks you are stealing
 mushrooms.  This animal is found on dungeon level 3 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 18.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land,
 but not through water.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It may carry up to 3 mushrooms.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage.  

[U] Wolf, Farmer Maggot's dog  (Light Slate 'C')
=== Num:618  Lev:3  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:24  Ac:30  Exp:16
A rather vicious dog belonging to Farmer Maggot.  It thinks you are stealing
 mushrooms.  This animal is found on dungeon level 3 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 18.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land,
 but not through water.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It may carry up to 3 mushrooms.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage.  

The Yellow mushroom patch|||es|  (Yellow ',')
=== Num:39  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:3  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to terrify you for 1d6 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time
 in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may carry
 one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores to terrify you for 1d6 damage.  

The Spotted mushroom patch|||es|  (Blue Slate ',')
=== Num:58  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to poison you for 2d4 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in
 7.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.
It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may
 carry one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores to poison you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The White mushroom patch|||es|  (White ',')
=== Num:650  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to freeze you for 2d4 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in
 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can release spores to freeze you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The Slime mold  (Mud ',')
=== Num:1183  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:4  Ac:1  Exp:1
Hideous green blobs:  crawling, oozing, and breeding.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 4 and moves slowly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It resists blindness
 .  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It may carry one or
 two mushrooms.  It can crawl to poison you for 1d1 damage.  

The White worm mass|||es|  (White 'w')
=== Num:26  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:10  Ac:1  Exp:2
It is a large slimy mass of worms.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 4 and moves extremely erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune
 to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 70 feet.  It can crawl to 
 poison you for 1d2 damage.  

The Blue ooze  (Blue 'j')
=== Num:79  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:16  Exp:2
It's blue and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength, ooze through tiny cracks and communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It may
 carry an adornment, potion, junk item or treasure.  It can crawl to freeze you
for 1d4 damage.  

The Blue mushroom patch|||es|  (Blue ',')
=== Num:651  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:1  Exp:2
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to electrify you for 2d4 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time
 in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can release spores to electrify you for
 2d4 damage.  

The Giant clear ant  (White 'a')
=== Num:691  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:18  Exp:2
It is large and has venomous mandibles.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 4 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 2.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is invisible.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for
 1d4 damage.  

The Maggot mass  (Mud 'w')
=== Num:1086  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:12  Ac:3  Exp:2
A disgusting and diseased mass of maggots.  This undead insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 4 and moves extremely erratically and slowly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 2.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright
 light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 70 feet.  It can crawl to infect you with disease for 1d2 
 damage.  

The Noxious mushroom patch|||es|  (Teal ',')
=== Num:1087  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:1  Exp:2
A small patch of mushrooms, oozing with an upleasent ichor.  This plant is
 normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 2.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening
 at its native depth.  It may release spores to infect you with disease for 2d4 
 damage; 1 time in 7.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It may
 carry one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores to infect you with disease 
 for 2d4 damage.  

The Apprentice priest||ess|s|  (Teal 'p')
=== Num:37  Lev:4  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:10  Exp:3
She is tripping over her priestly robes.  This woman priest is normally found 
 on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 3.82 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells which produce holy orbs, heal-self, 
 cause wounds, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors.  
 She always carries a lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a friend.  She
 may carry a weapon, armour, garment, lite, adornment, written item, potion, 
 edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Cave spider  (Light Dark 'S')
=== Num:50  Lev:4  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:7  Ac:16  Exp:3
It is a black spider that moves in fits and starts.  This insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 4 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 3.82 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and climb on walls
 and ceilings.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It appears in a giant web.
It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Scruffy looking hobbit  (Mud 'h')
=== Num:61  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:8  Exp:3
A short little dame, in bedraggled clothes.  She appears to be looking for a
 good tavern.  This evil thief is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves
 at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 3.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She can open doors, pick
 up objects and hide in unusual places.  She always carries a lite to see you.  
 She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 160 feet.  She
 may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, lite, written item, 
 potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d4 damage and 
 touch to steal gold from you.  

The Giant brown bat  (Umber 'b')
=== Num:93  Lev:4  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:15  Exp:3
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves somewhat erratically and very quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 3.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 100 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant emerald frog  (Green 'F')
=== Num:810  Lev:4  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:8  Exp:3
It is as big as a wolf.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 4 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 3.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water
 .  It breeds explosively.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant black frog  (Light Dark 'F')
=== Num:814  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:18  Exp:3
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves
 a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 3.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can 
 bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Black snake  (Light Dark 'J')
=== Num:936  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:17  Ac:38  Exp:3
It is about ten feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger or faster deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 50 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage and 
 crush to drain mana from you for 1d6 damage, plus spell points.  

The Goblin  (Mustard 'k')
=== Num:25  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:16  Exp:4
It is a small ugly humanoid.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally found 
 on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash
 down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible
 item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Blue jell|y|y|ies|  (Blue 'j')
=== Num:71  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:54  Ac:1  Exp:4
It's a large pile of pulsing blue flesh.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold.
It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 pays very little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It
 can touch to freeze you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant black centipede  (Light Dark 'c')
=== Num:737  Lev:4  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:10  Exp:4
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 4 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 5.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 70 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d3 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant maggot  (Mud 'I')
=== Num:906  Lev:4  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:8  Exp:4
It is about four feet long with large teeth and wriggles.  This insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves somewhat erratically at normal
 speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It breeds explosively.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite
to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant brown |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Umber 'r')
=== Num:1036  Lev:4  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:6  Exp:4
It is about three feet long with large teeth.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 4 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 5.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d2 
 damage.  

The Animated torch  (Light Umber '~')
=== Num:1184  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:4  Exp:4
A torch that somehow seems to have come alive.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 4 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 5.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It may
 carry a special object.  It can hit to burn you for 1d4 damage.  

The Apprentice rogue  (Teal 't')
=== Num:36  Lev:4  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:12  Exp:5
A rather shifty individual.  This evil woman thief is normally found on dungeon
 level 4 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.36
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She can open doors, pick up objects and hide in unusual places.  She is
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually
 appears with a friend.  She may carry a weapon, garment, tool, lite, adornment
 , musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for
 1d4 damage and touch to steal gold from you.  

The Metallic blue centipede  (Blue 'c')
=== Num:55  Lev:4  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:12  Ac:6  Exp:5
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 4 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 6.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 60
 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can crawl to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Grey snake  (Slate 'J')
=== Num:75  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:25  Ac:41  Exp:5
It is about ten feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger or faster deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 can eat bodies to regain strength.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 60 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage and crush to 
 hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Novice mage  (Red 'q')
=== Num:77  Lev:4  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:12  Exp:5
She is leaving behind a trail of dropped spell components.  This woman mage is
 normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 6.36 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at
 her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 mana bolts, recover mana, blink-self, blind or confuse; 1 time in 8.  She can 
 open doors.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She may carry a weapon, garment, lite, adornment, magical device, written item, 
 potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Memory moss|||es|  (Light Green ';')
=== Num:332  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:5
A mass of green vegetation.  You don't remember seeing anything like it before.
This plant is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 6.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which give
 invisibility or cause amnesia; 1 time in 5.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can hit to confuse you for
 1d4 damage.  

The Crow  (Slate 'B')
=== Num:559  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:9  Ac:12  Exp:5
It is a hooded crow, gray except for the black wings and head.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves quickly, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 400 feet.  It can peck to hurt you for 1d3 damage and 
 peck to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Copper snake  (Umber 'J')
=== Num:937  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:15  Exp:5
It is about three feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 4
 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger or faster deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 50 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d3 
 damage.  

The Baboon  (Magenta-Pink 'Y')
=== Num:1075  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:10  Exp:5
A squat, ugly humanoid covered with grime. She looks a bit like a stunted
 chimpanzee.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 6.36 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening
 at her native depth.  She may create a shot to hurt you for 1d5 damage; 1 time
 in 7.  She can open doors, pick up objects and track you over land, but not
 through water.  She is ever vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from
 100 feet.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Noxious mold  (Teal 'm')
=== Num:1089  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:44  Ac:8  Exp:5
It is a strange noxious growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 6.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It may release spores to infect you with disease for 1d5 damage; 1
 time in 7.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 20 feet.  It can release spores to infect you with disease for
 1d5 damage.  

The Yellow faerie  (Yellow 'H')
=== Num:1186  Lev:4  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:12  Exp:5
A little winged humanoid clothed surrounded by a glowing yellow lite.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal speed, but
 is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which produce lightning bolts, recover mana, 
 blink-self, terrify or slow; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, easily evade
 blows and missiles and track you over land, but not through water.  It must
 fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It resists lite.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it
 may notice from 180 feet.  It may carry a garment, adornment, edible item, 
 junk item or treasure.  It has no physical attacks.  

[U] Ted Sandyman the Miller  (Slate 'h')
=== Num:619  Lev:4  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:42  Ac:5  Exp:40
A surly grimy-faced and black-handed hobbit.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 4 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 50.91
 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He
 can open doors and bash down doors.  He always carries a lite to see you.  He
 is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 160 feet.  He may
 carry up to 3 good mushrooms.  He can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage and hit 
 to hurt you for 1d7 damage.  

[U] Bert, the Stone Troll  (Slate 'T')
=== Num:343  Lev:4  Rar:6  Spd:+0  Hp:116  Ac:40  Exp:100
Big, brawny, powerful and with a taste for dwarf.  He has friends called Bill
 and Tom.  This evil troll is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at
 normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 127.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He may throw a boulder at
to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time in 6.  He can open doors, bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  He is hurt by rock remover and bright light.  He tends to overlook
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears in groups.  
 He may carry a good chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or treasure
 .  He can hit to batter you for 3d7 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Bill, the Stone Troll  (Slate 'T')
=== Num:344  Lev:4  Rar:6  Spd:+0  Hp:116  Ac:40  Exp:100
Big, brawny, stupid and with a taste for dwarf.  He has friends called Bert and
 Tom.  This evil troll is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at normal
 speed.  Killing this creature is worth 127.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He may throw a boulder at
to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time in 6.  He can open doors, bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  He is hurt by rock remover and bright light.  He tends to overlook
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears in groups.  
 He may carry a good chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or treasure
 .  He can hit to batter you for 3d7 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Tom, the Stone Troll  (Slate 'T')
=== Num:345  Lev:4  Rar:6  Spd:+0  Hp:116  Ac:40  Exp:100
Big, brawny, stupid and with a taste for dwarf.  He has friends called Bill and
 Bert.   This evil troll is normally found on dungeon level 4 and moves at
 normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 127.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He may throw a boulder at
to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time in 6.  He can open doors, bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  He is hurt by rock remover and bright light.  He tends to overlook
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears in groups.  
 He may carry a good chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or treasure
 .  He can hit to batter you for 3d7 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Giant pack rat  (Light Pink 'r')
=== Num:1040  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:5  Ac:12  Exp:1
It is a rodent of unusual size.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 5 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant silver |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Light Slate 'r')
=== Num:548  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:2  Ac:4  Exp:2
It is about three feet long with large teeth.  As the light of your lamp falls
 on it, it seems to grow stronger.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 5 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 2.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at
 its native depth.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to absorb light from you for
 1d2 damage.  

The Red mushroom patch|||es|  (Red ',')
=== Num:652  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:1  Exp:2
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 5
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.73 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to burn you for 3d4 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 9
 .  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can release spores to burn you for 3d4 
 damage.  

The Green snake  (Light Green 'J')
=== Num:934  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:3  Ac:39  Exp:2
It is about two feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 5
 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger or faster deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may spit to poison 
 you for 1d5 damage; 1 time in 12.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  
 It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 50 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d5 damage and spit to 
 poison you for 1d5 damage.  

The Scarecrow  (Light Yellow 'g')
=== Num:395  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:30  Exp:4
A straw-filled figure animated by the malevolent spirits of dead birds.  This
 undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves somewhat
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 5.45 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened or confused.
It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can 
 hit to hurt you for 1d3 damage and touch to terrify you.  

The Guard dog  (Light Umber 'C')
=== Num:749  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:15  Ac:16  Exp:4
A rather vicious dog.  It thinks you are a thief.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 5 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is 
 larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage.  

The Wild cat  (Light Umber 'f')
=== Num:51  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:9  Ac:12  Exp:5
A larger than normal feline, hissing loudly.  Its velvet claws conceal a
 fistful of needles.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 5 and
 moves quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 6.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage.  

The Copperhead snake  (Orange 'J')
=== Num:87  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:14  Ac:20  Exp:5
It has a copper head and sharp venomous fangs.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 5 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is 
 larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d4 damage.  

The Soldier ant  (Blue Slate 'a')
=== Num:679  Lev:5  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:3  Exp:5
A large ant with powerful mandibles.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 5 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 6.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected
 by telepathy.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 100 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d5 
 damage.  

The Giant blue centipede  (Blue 'c')
=== Num:742  Lev:5  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:10  Exp:5
It is about five feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 6.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.
It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage and sting to hurt you 
 for 1d4 damage.  

The Red ooze  (Red 'j')
=== Num:925  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:16  Exp:5
It's red and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 5
 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can ooze through tiny
 cracks and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is immune to fire and poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It may carry an adornment, 
 potion, junk item or treasure.  It can crawl to burn you for 2d4 damage.  

The Dwarf python  (Light Yellow 'J')
=== Num:1181  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:35  Exp:5
One of the smaller pythons; it is about ten feet long and quite muscular.  This
animal is normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves a bit erratically at
 normal speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 6.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength
 .  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It can crush to hurt you for 1d8 
 damage.  

The Apprentice archer  (Light Slate 't')
=== Num:1188  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:8  Exp:5
A nasty little lass with a bow and arrow.  This woman archer is normally found 
 on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 6.82 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native
 depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 2.  She
 can open doors and pick up objects.  She takes a while to see intruders, which
 she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a friend.  She may
 carry a treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Mummified cat  (Light Slate 'f')
=== Num:1282  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:12  Exp:5
A cat wrapped in bandages with a blank stare.  It won't give up.  This evil
 undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 6.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 400 feet.  It can claw to hurt and poison you for 1d6 
 damage.  

The Killer bee  (Light Yellow 'I')
=== Num:1334  Lev:5  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:5  Ac:24  Exp:5
It is poisonous and aggressive.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level
 5 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 6.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can sting to hurt and poison you for
 1d4 damage.  

The Blubbering icky thing  (Light Slate 'i')
=== Num:33  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:17  Ac:4  Exp:6
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, hungry creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 5 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can
 eat bodies to regain strength and pick up objects.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry an adornment, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can crawl to poison you for 1d4 damage and crawl to eat your food
 .  

The Apprentice warrior  (Mud 't')
=== Num:35  Lev:5  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:17  Ac:14  Exp:6
She looks inexperienced but tough.  This woman warrior is normally found on
 dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native
 depth.  She can open doors and bash down doors.  She always carries a lite to
 see you.  She is observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  
 She usually appears with a friend.  She may carry a weapon, garment, tool, 
 lite, adornment, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit 
 to hurt you for 1d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Salamander  (Orange 'R')
=== Num:43  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:14  Ac:20  Exp:6
A small black and orange lizard.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 5 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength, swim under water and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite 
 to burn you for 1d3 damage.  

The Black naga  (Light Dark 'n')
=== Num:57  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:25  Ac:40  Exp:6
A large black serpent's body with a female torso.  This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed,
 but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native
 depth.  She can bash down doors and swim under water.  She pays very little
 attention to intruders, which she may notice from 160 feet.  She may carry a 
 written item, potion or treasure.  She can crush to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Green mold  (Green 'm')
=== Num:116  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:92  Ac:14  Exp:6
It is a strange growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found on
 dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot
 be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to terrify you for
 1d4 damage.  

The Gnome mage  (Light Red 'h')
=== Num:154  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:30  Ac:20  Exp:6
A mage of short stature.  This evil dwarf mage is normally found on dungeon
 level 5 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce poison balls, produce frost bolts, produce
 mana bolts, recover mana, blink-self, create darkness or summon a monster; 1
 time in 4.  She can open doors.  She cannot be slowed or paralyzed.  She is
 fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 180 feet.  She may
 carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, 
 written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you 
 for 1d5 damage.  

The Stone jell|y|y|ies|  (Light Slate 'j')
=== Num:353  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:48  Ac:1  Exp:6
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may create a shot to hurt you for 1d5 
 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 6.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can crush to 
 hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant green ant  (Green 'a')
=== Num:681  Lev:5  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:14  Ac:16  Exp:6
It is about three feet long and has poisonous pincers.  This insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  
 It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It
 usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 
 damage.  

The Greedy looking gnome  (Yellow 'h')
=== Num:870  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:13  Ac:14  Exp:6
A sly fellow of short stature. She appears to be looking for a quick profit.  
 This dwarf thief is normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which confuse or slow; 1 time in 9.  She can open doors, pick up
 objects and hide in unusual places.  She cannot be slowed or paralyzed.  She
 is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 180 feet.  She may
 carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, lite, written item, 
 potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage and 
 touch to steal items from you.  

The Blue icky thing  (Blue 'i')
=== Num:900  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:14  Exp:6
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, pestilent creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 5 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 140 feet.  It can touch to freeze you for 2d3 damage.  

The Forest goblin  (Light Green 'k')
=== Num:945  Lev:5  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:32  Exp:6
She is an ugly, green skinned primative looking humanoid.  This evil mix of 
 dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a shot to hurt you for 1d5 
 damage; 1 time in 10.  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects
 and track you over land, but not through water.  She is immune to poison.  She
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, 
 garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you 
 for 1d5 damage.  

The White mold  (White 'm')
=== Num:975  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:66  Ac:12  Exp:6
A strange white growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found on
 dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 poison you for 2d6 damage.  

The Noxious jell|y|y|ies|  (Teal 'j')
=== Num:1091  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:88  Ac:1  Exp:6
It is a large pile of rotting jelly, excreting a disgusting slime.  This plant
 is normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at
 its native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be stunned, 
 frightened or confused.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which it
 may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to infect you with disease for 2d6 
 damage.  

The Nibelung  (Deep Light Blue 'h')
=== Num:1323  Lev:5  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:20  Ac:12  Exp:6
Night dwarfs collecting riches.   This evil dwarf is normally found on dungeon
 level 5 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18 points for a 1st
 level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She can carry a lite
 to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She needs lite
 to see you.  She is hurt by bright light.  She resists disenchantment, 
 blindness and darkness.  She is observant of intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, lite, written item, potion, edible item
 or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage and touch to steal gold
 from you.  

The Apprentice ranger  (Light Yellow 'q')
=== Num:69  Lev:5  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:8  Exp:7
An agile hunter, ready and relaxed.  This woman warrior mage is normally found 
 on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 9.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native
 depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 1d6 damage; 1 time in 12 and
 is also magical, casting spells which cure-self or blink-self; 1 time in 12.  
 She can open doors and bash down doors.  She always carries a lite to see you.
She is observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually
 appears with a friend.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, garment, lite, 
 adornment, magical device, written item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She
 can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Goblin archer  (Light Slate 'k')
=== Num:94  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:24  Ac:16  Exp:7
It is an ugly humanoid wielding a bow.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is
 normally found on dungeon level 5 and moves at normal speed, but is more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 9.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 create an arrow to hurt you for 1d6 damage; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, 
 pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  It is hurt by 
 bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a weapon, missile weapon, 
 armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt
you for 1d9 damage.  

The Giant fruit fl|y|y|ies|  (Orange 'I')
=== Num:148  Lev:5  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:13  Ac:14  Exp:7
A fast-breeding, annoying pest.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level
 5 and moves extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 9.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d2 
 damage.  

The Huge white bat  (Light Slate 'b')
=== Num:721  Lev:5  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:18  Ac:15  Exp:7
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 5
 and moves somewhat erratically and very quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 9.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is immune to cold.  It takes quite a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant tree frog  (Light Green 'F')
=== Num:822  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:13  Ac:16  Exp:7
It is as big as a wolf.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 5 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 9.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.
It may spit to slow you; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies
 to regain strength, climb on walls and ceilings and swim under water.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 2d3 damage and spit to slow you.  

The Haughty looking el|f|f|ves|  (Light Slate 'l')
=== Num:875  Lev:5  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:16  Exp:7
An arrogant elf with an air of disdain. She appears to be looking for somewhere
 a little more sophisticated.  This elf is normally found on dungeon level 5
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 9.55 points for a
 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She may create
 an arrow to hurt you for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 7.  She can open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which
 she may notice from 180 feet.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, garment
 , lite, adornment, written item, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure
 .  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  
 

[U] Bill Ferny, Agent of Saruman  (Blue 't')
=== Num:620  Lev:5  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:60  Ac:2  Exp:47
A swarthy man of Bree.  He has heavy black brows and dark scornful eyes; his
 large mouth is curled in a sneer.  He sells anything to anybody and enjoys
 making mischief for his personal amusement.  This man is normally found on
 dungeon level 5 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 64.09 points
 for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He may 
 insult to do you no effect; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors and bash down doors
 .  He always carries a lite to see you.  He is fairly observant of intruders,
 which he may notice from 130 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, 
 garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions or edible items.  
 He can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage and 
 insult to do you no effect.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress
 further.  

[U] Lotho Sackville-Baggins, Betrayer of the Shire  (Purple 'h')
=== Num:621  Lev:5  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:48  Ac:8  Exp:52
The `Chief Shiriff' of Bag End.  Using money obtained from Isengard and the
 sale of pipe-weed, he bought up much property in the Shire and supported the
 ruffians known as `The Chief's Men'.  After imprisoning Will Whitfoot, the
 rightful Mayor of the Shire, Lotho took over and began industrializing and
 regimenting life in the Shire.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 5 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 70.91 points for a
 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He can open doors
 and bash down doors.  He always carries a lite to see you.  He is fairly
 observant of intruders, which he may notice from 160 feet.  He may carry up to
 3 good weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items
 , potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage and hit to 
 hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

[U] Bullroarer the Hobbit  (Light Umber 'h')
=== Num:76  Lev:5  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:60  Ac:8  Exp:83
He is a sturdy hobbit who is renowned for his unusual strength and vigour.  He
 can prove a troublesome opponent.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 5 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 113.18 points for a
 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He can open doors
 and bash down doors.  He always carries a lite to see you.  He is fairly
 observant of intruders, which he may notice from 160 feet.  He may carry up to
 3 good weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items
 , potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage and hit to 
 hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Grey mushroom patch|||es|  (Slate ',')
=== Num:16  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:1  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to confuse you for 1d4 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time
 in 12.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.
It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may
 carry one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores to confuse you for 1d4 
 damage.  

The Green mushroom patch|||es|  (Green ',')
=== Num:648  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to reduce wisdom from you for 2d3 damage and may grow ammunition
 ; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may
 notice from 20 feet.  It may carry one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores
to reduce wisdom from you for 2d3 damage.  

The Blind eye  (White 'e')
=== Num:789  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:31  Ac:6  Exp:1
A strange eye, milky white with blindness.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which blink-self, drain mana or 
 blind; 1 time in 7.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is hurt by bright
 light.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It has no physical
 attacks.  

The Radiation eye  (Magenta-Pink 'e')
=== Num:67  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:6  Exp:2
A disembodied eye, crackling with energy.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its
 native depth.  It may gaze to reduce strength and size from you for 1d6 damage
 ; 1 time in 7 and is also magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in
 11.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It
 cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to reduce strength and size from you for 1d6 
 damage.  

The Black mushroom patch|||es|  (Light Dark ',')
=== Num:649  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:1  Exp:2
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to reduce intelligence from you for 4d2 damage and may grow
 ammunition; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may carry one or two mushrooms.  It can 
 release spores to reduce intelligence from you for 4d2 damage.  

The Copper mushroom patch|||es|  (Umber ',')
=== Num:654  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:12  Ac:1  Exp:2
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 3d2 damage and may 
 grow ammunition; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune
 to acid.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may carry one or
 two mushrooms.  It can release spores to reduce dexterity and agility from you
for 3d2 damage.  

The Apprentice shaman  (Light Purple 'p')
=== Num:1019  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:6  Exp:2
She waves a magical talisman at you.  This woman shaman is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 2.91 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells which produce mana bolts, heal-self, 
 blink-self, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors.  She
 always carries a lite to see you.  She is observant of intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a friend.  She may carry a
weapon, armour, garment, lite, adornment, written item, potion, edible item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant white rat  (White 'r')
=== Num:73  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:3  Ac:7  Exp:3
It is a very vicious rodent.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 4.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.
It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It breeds explosively.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite
to hurt and poison you for 1d3 damage.  

The Grid bug  (Violet 'I')
=== Num:1316  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:5  Ac:2  Exp:3
A strange electric bug.   This mix of animal and insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 4.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can fly
 over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 lightning.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 100 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite
to electrify you for 1d4 damage.  

The Disenchanter eye  (Light Purple 'e')
=== Num:85  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:31  Ac:6  Exp:4
A disembodied eye, crackling with magic.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves slowly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  
 It may gaze to disenchant your armour and weapons; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists disenchantment, magical
 spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can 
 gaze to disenchant your armour and weapons.  

The Giant grey rat  (Mud 'r')
=== Num:124  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:12  Exp:4
It is a rodent of unusual size.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 6 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 5.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It breeds explosively.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite
to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Slimy mushroom patch|||es|  (Mustard ',')
=== Num:658  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:1  Exp:4
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.82 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to dissolve you for 3d3 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time
 in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can release spores to dissolve you for
 3d3 damage.  

The Giant brown centipede  (Umber 'c')
=== Num:738  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:13  Ac:10  Exp:4
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 5.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 70 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d3 
 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Brain ooze  (Light Pink 'j')
=== Num:885  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:16  Ac:7  Exp:5
It oozes towards you, and your head starts to hurt...  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves extremely erratically at normal
 speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 7.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.
It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed
 or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 80
 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can crawl to confuse you for 1d1 
 damage and crawl to batter you for 5d1 damage.  

The Blue worm mass|||es|  (Blue 'w')
=== Num:74  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:-10  Hp:22  Ac:12  Exp:6
It is a large slimy mass of worms.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 6 and moves extremely erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright
 light.  It is immune to cold.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened.
It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 70 feet.  It can 
 crawl to freeze you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant black |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Slate 'r')
=== Num:1037  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:8  Ac:8  Exp:6
It is about three feet long with large teeth.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 8.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to wound you for 3d2 
 damage.  

The Rabid jackal  (Light Green 'C')
=== Num:1088  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:5  Exp:6
A large dog, foaming at the mouth.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 8.73 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened.  It is observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It can bite to infect you with
 disease for 2d3 damage and bite to infect you with disease for 2d3 damage.  

The Gazing eye  (Slate 'e')
=== Num:1172  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+20  Hp:35  Ac:7  Exp:6
A lidless gazing eye, crackling with mana.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves very quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the
 dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 8.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce mana bolts or drain mana;
 1 time in 1.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is hurt
 by bright light.  It cannot be frightened or confused.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It has no physical attacks.


The Novice priest||ess|s|  (Blue 'p')
=== Num:89  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:24  Ac:15  Exp:7
She is tripping over his priestly robes.  This woman priest is normally found 
 on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 10.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells which produce holy orbs, heal-self, 
 cause wounds, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 8.  She can open doors.  She
 always carries a lite to see you.  She is observant of intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a 
 weapon, armour, garment, lite, adornment, written item, potion, edible item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage.  

The Snaga  (Light Umber 'k')
=== Num:96  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:32  Exp:7
She is one of the many weaker 'slave' orcs, often mistakenly known as a cave
 goblin.  This evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves at
 normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 10.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She
 resists darkness.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may
 notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Raven  (Light Dark 'B')
=== Num:560  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:12  Ac:12  Exp:7
Larger than a crow, and pitch black.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 6 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 10.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 400
 feet.  It can peck to hurt you for 1d4 damage and peck to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage.  

The Guardian ant  (Light Violet 'a')
=== Num:680  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:24  Ac:3  Exp:7
A large ant with powerful mandibles.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 10.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It resists nexus and teleportation.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Gnome illusionist  (Light Yellow 'h')
=== Num:879  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:31  Ac:10  Exp:7
An illusionist of short stature.  This evil dwarf mage is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 10.18 points for a
 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which haste-self, recover mana, blink-self, 
 create darkness, cause hallucinations, blind, confuse or slow; 1 time in 5.  
 She can open doors.  She cannot be slowed or paralyzed.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one
 or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items
 , potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage.


The Brown icky thing  (Umber 'i')
=== Num:897  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:14  Exp:7
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, diseased creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 6 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 10.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 140 feet.  It can touch to reduce charisma from you for 2d5 damage.  

The Orange icky thing  (Orange 'i')
=== Num:898  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:34  Ac:20  Exp:7
It is a strange, slimy, icky creature, with rudimentary intelligence, but evil
 cunning.  It hungers for food, and you look tasty.  This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves somewhat erratically and slowly,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 10.18
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 is magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse; 1
 time in 6.  It can open doors.  It is immune to poison.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It can crawl to poison you 
 for 1d4 damage, crawl to absorb light from you, hit to hurt you for 1d4 damage
 and hit to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Pink ooze  (Magenta-Pink 'j')
=== Num:926  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:17  Ac:16  Exp:7
It's pink and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 10.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can ooze through tiny
 cracks and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It may carry an adornment, 
 potion, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to reduce strength and size from 
 you for 2d4 damage.  

The Blue snake  (Blue 'J')
=== Num:935  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:25  Ac:40  Exp:7
It is about ten feet long and charged with electricity.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but
 is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 10.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is immune to lightning.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It can bite
to hurt you for 1d4 damage and crush to electrify you for 1d6 damage.  

The Red snake  (Red 'J')
=== Num:938  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:17  Ac:39  Exp:7
It is about six feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger or faster deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 10.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may gaze to confuse you
 ; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.
It is immune to fire.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 50 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d5 damage and gaze to 
 confuse you.  

The Green ooze  (Green 'j')
=== Num:53  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:7  Ac:16  Exp:8
It's green and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 11.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength, ooze through tiny cracks and communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and 
 poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80
 feet.  It may carry an adornment, potion, junk item or treasure.  It can crawl
to dissolve you for 1d3 damage.  

The Clear mushroom patch|||es|  (White ',')
=== Num:139  Lev:6  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:13  Ac:1  Exp:8
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to
 chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 11.64 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may release spores 
 to hurt you for 1d1 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 11.  It is
 invisible.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept
 or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  
 It may carry one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores to hurt you for 1d1 
 damage.  

The Wol|f|f|ves|  (Umber 'C')
=== Num:147  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:20  Ac:30  Exp:8
It howls and snaps at you.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 11.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can
 eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land, but not
 through water.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage.  

The Giant white dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (White 'I')
=== Num:182  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:13  Ac:20  Exp:8
It is a large dragonfly whose wings whip up a cloud of frost.  This mix of 
 dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves somewhat
 erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 11.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It may breathe frost; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down
 doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to 
 freeze you for 1d3 damage.  

The Many-eyed moss|||es|  (Orange ';')
=== Num:668  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:8
A mass of orange vegetation. Its many eyes follow your every movement.  This 
 plant is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 11.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may gaze to blind you for 1d4 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters or gaze to blind you for 1d4 damage, doubled
 against eye monsters; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 give invisibility or blind; 1 time in 5.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can gaze to blind you for
 1d4 damage, doubled against eye monsters and gaze to blind you for 1d4 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters.  

The Giant blue frog  (Light Blue 'F')
=== Num:816  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:12  Exp:8
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves
 a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 11.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d4 damage.  

The Brown jell|y|y|ies|  (Umber 'j')
=== Num:920  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:139  Ac:1  Exp:8
It is a large pulsating mound of brown flesh.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 11.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 reduce charisma from you for 1d4 damage and touch to reduce charisma from you 
 for 1d4 damage.  

The Boa constrictor  (Light Red 'J')
=== Num:939  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:41  Ac:45  Exp:8
It is about sixteen feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 11.64 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies
 to regain strength.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 50 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage and crush to hurt
you for 2d6 damage.  

The Floating skull  (Light Blue 's')
=== Num:1108  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:26  Ac:30  Exp:8
A floating skull possessed by a malignant spirit.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 11.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 is magical, casting spells intelligently which recover mana, blink-self, 
 teleport to, cause wounds, terrify or slow; 1 time in 4.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears with a
 friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Apprentice paladin  (Blue Slate 'p')
=== Num:70  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:13  Exp:9
An adventurer both devoutly religious and skillful in combat.  This woman
 warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed.
A kill of this creature is worth 13.09 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which 
 heal-self, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 10.  She can open doors and 
 bash down doors.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She is observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a
 friend.  She may carry a weapon, armour, garment, lite, adornment, written item
 , potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage and 
 hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Novice rogue  (Blue 't')
=== Num:91  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:28  Ac:12  Exp:9
A rather shifty individual.  This evil woman thief is normally found on dungeon
 level 6 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 13.09
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 may create a shot to hurt you for 2d4 damage; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors
 , pick up objects and hide in unusual places.  She is observant of intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may
 carry a weapon, missile weapon, garment, tool, lite, adornment, musical item, 
 potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage and 
 touch to steal gold from you.  

The Pink jell|y|y|ies|  (Magenta-Pink 'j')
=== Num:103  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:117  Ac:1  Exp:9
It is a large pulsating mound of pink flesh.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 13.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 reduce strength and size from you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant bronze dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Light Umber 'I')
=== Num:266  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:13  Ac:20  Exp:9
This great gleaming bronze dragonfly has wings which beat mesmerically fast.  
 This insect is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves extremely
 erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 13.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It may breathe confusion; 1 time in 9.  It can bash down
 doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed
 or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  
 It may carry a precious metal.  It can bite to burn you for 1d3 damage.  

The Wooden figurine  (Mustard 'g')
=== Num:497  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:30  Exp:9
A small, wooden doll-like figure with a menacing painted face.  This creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 13.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can easily evade blows and missiles.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened or confused.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can hit to wound you for 1d3 damage.  

The Huge grey bat  (Slate 'b')
=== Num:722  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:22  Ac:15  Exp:9
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 6
 and moves somewhat erratically and very quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 13.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Red jell|y|y|ies|  (Red 'j')
=== Num:921  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:162  Ac:1  Exp:9
It is a large pulsating mound of red flesh.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 13.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to burn you for 1d8 
 damage.  

The River goblin  (Light Blue 'k')
=== Num:946  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:32  Exp:9
She is an ugly, piratical looking humanoid armed with a hook.  This evil mix of
dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 13.09 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors, swim
 under water and track you over land, but not through water.  She is immune to 
 poison.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from
 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile
 weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can 
 hit to wound you for 2d4 damage.  

The Rotten icky thing  (Light Purple 'i')
=== Num:1312  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:14  Exp:9
This undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves somewhat
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 13.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may covers you in slime for 4d6 damage; 1
 time in 1.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can covers you in slime for
 4d6 damage.  

The Brown mold  (Umber 'm')
=== Num:92  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:66  Ac:12  Exp:10
A strange brown growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 14.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 confuse you for 1d4 damage.  

The Wooden golem  (Light Umber 'g')
=== Num:504  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:51  Ac:30  Exp:10
A lumbering figure powered by oaken cogs and pine cone gears.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves slowly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 14.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened or confused.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to 
 batter you for 1d6 damage and hit to batter you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant ebony frog  (Light Dark 'F')
=== Num:813  Lev:6  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:18  Exp:10
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 6 and moves
 a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 14.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  It
 breeds explosively.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Surly looking dwar|f|f|ves|  (Mustard 'h')
=== Num:874  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:24  Ac:20  Exp:10
A scowling short lass with a two-foot beard. She appears to be looking for a
 good smithy to sharpen her axe.  This dwarf is normally found on dungeon level
 6 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 14.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She can 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She resists blindness.  She
 is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 160 feet.  She may
 carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, lite, written item, 
 potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage and 
 hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage.  

The Swordfish  (Light Slate 'F')
=== Num:1318  Lev:6  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:16  Ac:10  Exp:10
A fish with a swordlike "beak".  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 6 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 14.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It must swim and cannot move out of water.  It is cold
 blooded.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 140
 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d5 
 damage.  

The Novice warrior  (Umber 't')
=== Num:90  Lev:6  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:31  Ac:16  Exp:11
She looks inexperienced but tough.  This woman warrior is normally found on
 dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 16.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.
She can open doors and bash down doors.  She always carries a lite to see you.  
 She is observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, garment, tool, lite, 
 adornment, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt
you for 1d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Dead ant  (Light Red 'a')
=== Num:1296  Lev:6  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:17  Ac:34  Exp:11
It is large and has venomous mandibles.  This evil undead insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 16.00 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite 
 to hurt you for 1d4 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 1d4 damage.  

[U] Radbug, the Goblin  (Light Teal 'k')
=== Num:110  Lev:6  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:144  Ac:20  Exp:130
Strong and powerful, for a goblin.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally
 found on dungeon level 6 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is
 worth 189.09 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native
 depth.  He can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not
 through water.  He is hurt by bright light.  He is immune to poison.  He takes
 a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually
 appears with escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, 
 armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you 
 for 1d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage.  

The Ant nest  (Light Umber '<')
=== Num:1306  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:70  Ac:3  Exp:1
A mound of earth, crawling with ants of various shapes and sizes.  There might
 be something valuable inside.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 7
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which summon monsters of the same
 group; 1 time in 1.  It can bash down doors.  It is not detected by telepathy.
It is hurt by rock remover.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It usually appears with escorts.  It may carry a good treasure.  It has
 no physical attacks.  

The Purple mushroom patch|||es|  (Purple ',')
=== Num:88  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:1  Exp:3
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 7
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 4.64 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to reduce constitution from you for 1d2 damage or release spores
to reduce constitution from you for 1d2 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time
 in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may carry one or two 
 mushrooms.  It can release spores to reduce constitution from you for 1d2 
 damage and release spores to reduce constitution from you for 1d2 damage.  

The Termite mound  (Umber '<')
=== Num:1307  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:139  Ac:4  Exp:3
A giant mound of earth, crawling with termites of various shapes and sizes. 
 There might be something valuable inside.  This plant is normally found on
 dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 4.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is not
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which summon
 monsters of the same group; 1 time in 1.  It can bash down doors.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears with escorts.  It may carry a
 good special object or treasure.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Bloodshot eye  (Light Pink 'e')
=== Num:101  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:6  Exp:4
A disembodied eye, bloodshot and nasty.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 6.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its
 native depth.  It may gaze to blind you for 2d6 damage, doubled against eye
 monsters; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1
 time in 6.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly
 and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It
 cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to blind you for 2d6 damage, doubled against
 eye monsters.  

The Clear snake  (White 'J')
=== Num:49  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:45  Ac:38  Exp:5
It is about ten feet long and stealthy.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 7 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 7.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is invisible.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It can bite to
hurt you for 1d4 damage and crush to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Red worm mass|||es|  (Red 'w')
=== Num:86  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:-10  Hp:22  Ac:12  Exp:6
It is a large slimy mass of worms.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves extremely erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 9.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright
 light.  It is immune to fire.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened.
It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 70 feet.  It can 
 crawl to burn you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant spotted rat  (Blue Slate 'r')
=== Num:1044  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:8  Ac:20  Exp:8
It is a rodent of unusual size.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 7 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 12.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It breeds explosively.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite
to hurt and poison you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant black rat  (Light Dark 'r')
=== Num:1045  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:16  Exp:8
It is a rodent of unusual size.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 7 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 12.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is immune to poison.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d5 damage.  

The Green glutton ghost  (Green 'G')
=== Num:80  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+20  Hp:7  Ac:20  Exp:9
It is a very ugly green ghost with a voracious appetite.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves extremely erratically
 and very quickly.  Destruction of this creature is worth 13.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can pass
 through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It may carry
 one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can 
 touch to eat your food for 1d1 damage and slime to do you no effect.  

The Manes|||es|  (Light Yellow 'u')
=== Num:100  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:32  Exp:9
It is a minor but aggressive demon.  This evil demon is normally found on
 dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 13.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may create a spike to 
 burn you for 1d5 damage; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors.  It is immune
 to lightning and fire.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Giant black |louse|louse|lice|  (Slate 'I')
=== Num:187  Lev:7  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:10  Ac:7  Exp:9
It makes you itch just to look at it.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 13.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It can 
 bite to hurt you for 1d2 damage.  

The Blink dog  (Light Blue 'C')
=== Num:225  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:35  Ac:20  Exp:9
A strange magical member of the canine race, its form seems to shimmer and fade
 in front of your very eyes.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 7
 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 13.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which blink-self, teleport-self to or teleport to; 1 time in 4.  It can bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over
 land, but not through water.  It resists teleportation.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d7 damage.  

The Blue dragon bat  (Blue 'b')
=== Num:250  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:10  Ac:26  Exp:9
It is a glowing blue bat with a sharp tail.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 13.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe lightning; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and can
 eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is immune to lightning.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite
to electrify you for 1d3 damage.  

The Shadow faerie  (Blue Slate 'H')
=== Num:1308  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+5  Hp:20  Ac:12  Exp:9
A little winged humanoid clothed surrounded by shadow.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves quickly, but is faster deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 13.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which produce lightning bolts, recover mana, blink-self, give
 invisibility or create darkness; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, easily evade
 blows and missiles and track you over land, but not through water.  It must
 fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It resists darkness.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 180 feet.  It may carry a garment, adornment, edible
 item, junk item or treasure.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Metallic red centipede  (Red 'c')
=== Num:64  Lev:7  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:18  Ac:9  Exp:10
It is about six feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 7 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 15.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80
 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 
 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant pink frog  (Magenta-Pink 'F')
=== Num:104  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:16  Exp:10
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves
 somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 15.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can 
 bite to reduce strength and size from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Rock python  (Light Umber 'J')
=== Num:423  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:55  Ac:55  Exp:10
It is about twenty feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 7
 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 15.45 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is threatening at its native depth.  It may create a shot to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain
 strength.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 50 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage and crush to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage.  

The Night willow  (Blue Slate ':')
=== Num:673  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:297  Ac:5  Exp:10
It is a twisted black-barked tree. A tree can't possibly hurt you, but you feel
 fear, disorientation and drowsiness as you approach.  This evil undead plant
 is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves slowly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 15.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which create darkness, 
 drain mana, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It may carry a special object or 
 treasure.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Giant red centipede  (Red 'c')
=== Num:741  Lev:7  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:13  Ac:26  Exp:10
It is about six feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 7 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 15.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d2 damage and sting to hurt and
 poison you for 1d2 damage.  

The Goblin dart-thrower  (Light Violet 'k')
=== Num:1187  Lev:7  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:13  Exp:10
A shifty-looking ugly humanoid that throws poisoned darts.  Usually found in
 small groups.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 15.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may create a dart to 
 poison you for 4d5 damage; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, pick up objects
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 240 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment
 , tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 
 damage.  

The Zombified dog  (Yellow 'C')
=== Num:1281  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:18  Exp:10
It is a dead dog, following you - its flesh rotting and the skin flayed from
 its bones.  This evil undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 7 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 15.45 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which haste-self or incur beserk rage; 1 time in 6.  It can can eat
 bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land, but not through
 water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 320 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Yellow jell|y|y|ies|  (Yellow 'j')
=== Num:60  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:45  Ac:1  Exp:11
It's a large pile of yellow flesh.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 17.00 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 16.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 poison you for 1d3 damage.  

The Cave orc  (Blue Slate 'o')
=== Num:98  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:32  Exp:11
She is often found in huge numbers in deep caves.  This evil orc is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful
 or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 17.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  She is hurt by bright light.  She resists darkness.  She takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually
 appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, 
 tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage.  

The Novice ranger  (Light Slate 'q')
=== Num:114  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:8  Exp:11
An agile hunter, ready and relaxed.  This woman warrior mage is normally found 
 on dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 17.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native
 depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 1d6 damage; 1 time in 8 and is
 also magical, casting spells which cure-self or blink-self; 1 time in 8.  She
 can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She always carries a
 lite to see you.  She is observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, 
 garment, lite, adornment, magical device, written item, potion, edible item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d7 
 damage.  

The Moross moss|||es|  (Yellow ';')
=== Num:669  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:11
A mass of yellow vegetation. You feel apathetic looking at its sluggish fronds.
This plant is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 17.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which give
 invisibility, teleport-self to or slow; 1 time in 5.  It is cold blooded.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can hit to 
 reduce dexterity and agility from you for 1d4 damage and hit to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Thorn tree  (Light Umber ':')
=== Num:674  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:192  Ac:20  Exp:11
It has branches covered with cruel-looking thorns.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 17.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It may create a spike to hurt you for 1d6 damage and may grow
 ammunition; 1 time in 1.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists 
 blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  
 It may carry a special object or treasure.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage.  

The Yellow icky thing  (Yellow 'i')
=== Num:895  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:12  Exp:11
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, poisonous creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 17.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can touch to poison you for
 3d5 damage.  

The Creeping copper coins||||  (Umber '$')
=== Num:72  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:30  Ac:24  Exp:12
It appears to be a pile of copper coins.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 7 and moves slowly.  A kill of this creature is worth 18.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 30 feet.  It may carry one or two precious metals.  It can hit to 
 hurt you for 3d3 damage and touch to remove enchantments from you.  

The Rattlesnake  (Light Purple 'J')
=== Num:97  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:23  Ac:44  Exp:12
It is recognized by the hard-scaled end of its body that is often rattled to
 frighten its prey.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves
 somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 18.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may spit to poison you 
 for 1d2 damage; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to
 regain strength.  It is immune to poison.  It is vigilant for intruders, which
 it may notice from 60 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d5 damage
 and spit to poison you for 1d2 damage.  

The Wood el|f|f|ves|  (Green 'l')
=== Num:108  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:37  Ac:16  Exp:12
An elven figure.  This elf is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves at
 normal speed, but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 18.55 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is threatening at her native depth.  She may create a dart to poison you 
 for 2d5 damage; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which create
 darkness, cause hunger or confuse; 1 time in 10.  She can open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  She lights up the surroundings.  She resists 
 lite.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.
She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, garment, lite, adornment, written item, 
 musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for
 1d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant gold dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Yellow 'I')
=== Num:234  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:18  Ac:20  Exp:12
Large beating wings support this dazzling insect.  A loud buzzing noise
 pervades the air.  This mix of dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 18.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe sound; 1
 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  
 It cannot be stunned.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It may carry a precious metal.  It can bite to hurt and poison
you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant ebony bat  (Light Dark 'b')
=== Num:723  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:31  Ac:15  Exp:12
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 7
 and moves somewhat erratically and very quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 18.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Gnome priest||ess|s|  (Light Teal 'h')
=== Num:878  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:35  Ac:24  Exp:12
A priestesss  This evil dwarf priest is normally found on dungeon level 7 and
 moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 18.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which heal-self, cure-self, cause wounds, incur heroism or summon a monster; 1
 time in 4.  She can open doors and pick up objects.  She cannot be slowed or 
 paralyzed.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from
 180 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, lites, written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Giant blue dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Blue 'I')
=== Num:908  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:24  Exp:12
A vast, lightning-struck dragonfly.  This mix of dragon and insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 18.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may
 breathe lightning; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to fire.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Skeleton goblin  (Mud 's')
=== Num:83  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:26  Exp:13
It is a small animated goblin skeleton.  This evil undead mix of dwarf and orc
 is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 20.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  
 It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Wood spider  (Light Umber 'S')
=== Num:99  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:10  Ac:16  Exp:13
It scuttles towards you.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 7 and
 moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 20.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.  It is
 rarely detected by telepathy.  It appears in a giant web.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage
 and sting to hurt and poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Green icky thing  (Green 'i')
=== Num:105  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:12  Exp:13
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, acidic creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 20.09 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can touch to dissolve you 
 for 2d5 damage.  

The Night lizard  (Deep Light Blue 'R')
=== Num:109  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:16  Exp:13
It is a black lizard with overlapping scales and a powerful jaw.  This animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves a bit erratically at normal
 speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 20.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which create darkness; 1 time in 5.  It
 can can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to cold.  It resists darkness.  It takes quite a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can bite to freeze you 
 for 2d7 damage.  

The Giant green dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Green 'I')
=== Num:208  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:20  Exp:13
A great, foul-smelling dragonfly.  This mix of dragon and insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 20.09 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may
 breathe poison; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot
 move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d3 damage.  

The Crebain  (Violet 'B')
=== Num:561  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:24  Ac:12  Exp:13
A type of crow, specially bred by the forces of evil as spies; their
 rudimentary intelligence guided by an evil mind has tracked you down, and now
 they seek to alert other evil creatures to your presence.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves quickly, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 20.09 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may shriek to 
 do you no effect; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which probe
 your weaknesses; 1 time in 6.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 400
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, 
 peck to wound you for 1d4 damage and shriek to do you no effect.  

The Giant long-eared bat  (Mustard 'b')
=== Num:718  Lev:7  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:22  Ac:22  Exp:13
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 7
 and moves somewhat erratically and very quickly.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 20.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d2 damage and claw to hurt you for
 1d2 damage.  

The Eye sore  (Teal 'e')
=== Num:791  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:58  Ac:6  Exp:13
A disembodied eye, hideously ugly.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 20.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 may gaze to reduce charisma from you for 1d6 damage, gaze to reduce charisma
 from you for 1d6 damage, gaze to reduce charisma from you for 1d6 damage or 
 gaze to reduce charisma from you for 1d6 damage; 1 time in 7 and is also
 magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 7.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze 
 to reduce charisma from you for 1d6 damage, gaze to reduce charisma from you 
 for 1d6 damage, gaze to reduce charisma from you for 1d6 damage and gaze to 
 reduce charisma from you for 1d6 damage.  

The Pink icky thing  (Magenta-Pink 'i')
=== Num:896  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:14  Exp:13
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, pestilent creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 20.09 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 140 feet.  It can touch to reduce strength and size from you for 2d5 
 damage.  

The Giant red dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Red 'I')
=== Num:907  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:30  Ac:24  Exp:13
A vast, fiery-bright dragonfly.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 20.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe fire; 1
 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can bite to terrify you for
 1d6 damage.  

The White naga  (White 'n')
=== Num:984  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:40  Exp:13
A large white serpent's body with a female torso.  This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed,
 but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 20.09 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her
 native depth.  She can bash down doors and swim under water.  She is immune to 
 poison.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which she may notice
 from 170 feet.  She may carry a written item, potion or treasure.  She can 
 crush to hurt you for 1d8 damage and sting to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Leech  (Light Pink 'w')
=== Num:1320  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:20  Exp:13
Yech! The disgusting thing only wants your blood!   This mix of animal and 
 insect is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves a bit erratically and
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 20.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It must swim and cannot move out of water.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.
It can bite to hurt you for 3d1 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d1 damage.  

The Goblin wizard  (Light Red 'k')
=== Num:160  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:58  Ac:24  Exp:14
A small ugly humanoid that radiates some power.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc
 is normally found on dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 21.64 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which produce poison balls, recover mana, blink-self, 
 teleport-self, teleport-self to, summon a monster, blind or slow; 1 time in 4.
It can open doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is hurt
 by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 180 feet.  It may carry a weapon, missile
 weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit
to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Gnome rogue  (Blue 'h')
=== Num:877  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:38  Ac:28  Exp:14
A thief of short stature.  This evil dwarf thief is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 21.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which blink-self, confuse or slow; 1 time in 9.  She can 
 open doors, pick up objects and hide in unusual places.  She cannot be slowed
 or paralyzed.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from
 180 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, lites, written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage and touch to steal gold from you.  

The Dwarven priest||ess|s|  (Light Blue 'h')
=== Num:883  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:42  Ac:28  Exp:14
A dwarven priestessshisher  This dwarf priest is normally found on dungeon
 level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 21.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which heal-self, cure-self, cause wounds, incur heroism, 
 terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  She can open doors, bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  She resists blindness.  She is fairly observant of intruders,
 which she may notice from 180 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile
 weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items, potions, edible items
 or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Silver mold  (Light Slate 'm')
=== Num:974  Lev:7  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:70  Ac:20  Exp:14
It is a strange silver growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 7 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 21.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to poison 
 you.  

The Floating eye  (Orange 'e')
=== Num:27  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:3  Ac:6  Exp:1
A disembodied eye, floating a few feet above the ground.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 older deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is not
 threatening at its native depth.  It may gaze to paralyze you; 1 time in 14.  
 It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot
 move underwater or through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be 
 frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20
 feet.  It can gaze to paralyze you.  

The Plague |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Teal 'r')
=== Num:1090  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:10  Exp:2
Vermin, deadly not on its own account, but because of the disease it carries
 and the numbers it appears in.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 8 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 80 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite 
 to infect you with disease for 1d2 damage.  

The White slime  (White ',')
=== Num:659  Lev:8  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:5  Ac:1  Exp:3
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 8 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 4.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  
 It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can touch to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Blinking eye  (Light Yellow 'e')
=== Num:788  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:17  Ac:6  Exp:3
A disembodied eye, that blinks occasionally.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 4.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its
 native depth.  It may gaze to paralyze you; 1 time in 7 and is also magical,
 casting spells which blink-self; 1 time in 7.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze 
 to paralyze you.  

The Green worm mass|||es|  (Green 'w')
=== Num:48  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:15  Ac:3  Exp:5
It is a large slimy mass of worms.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 8 and moves extremely erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune
 to acid.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 70 feet.  It can crawl to 
 dissolve you for 1d3 damage.  

The Crawling eye  (Mud 'e')
=== Num:786  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:14  Ac:6  Exp:5
A disembodied eye, that slowly crawls its way around the dungeon.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves slowly, but is larger
 or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 8.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 gaze to paralyze you; 1 time in 7.  It can communicate telepathically with its
 own kind.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to 
 paralyze you.  

The Yellow worm mass|||es|  (Yellow 'w')
=== Num:65  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:18  Ac:4  Exp:6
It is a large slimy mass of worms.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 8 and moves extremely erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 9.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 70 feet.  It can crawl to reduce dexterity and
 agility from you for 1d3 damage.  

The Green dragon bat  (Green 'b')
=== Num:714  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:15  Ac:22  Exp:9
It is a sharp-tailed bat, rank with venom.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 14.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe poison; 1
 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It
 must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is immune to poison.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d3 damage.  

The Purple ooze  (Purple 'j')
=== Num:927  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:25  Ac:16  Exp:10
It's purple and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 8
 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 16.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can ooze through tiny
 cracks and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It may carry an adornment, 
 potion, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to reduce constitution from you 
 for 2d4 damage.  

The River orc  (Teal 'o')
=== Num:1005  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:32  Exp:10
A river dwelling orc with a piratical bent.  This evil orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 16.36
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 may create a dart to hurt you for 3d4 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors
 , bash down doors, pick up objects, swim under water and track you over land,
 but not through water.  She resists darkness.  She takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, 
 junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Red dragon bat  (Red 'b')
=== Num:264  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:28  Exp:11
It is a sharp-tailed bat, wreathed in fire.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 18.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and can eat
 bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through
 webs.  It is immune to fire.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to burn you 
 for 1d3 damage.  

The White dragon bat  (White 'b')
=== Num:724  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:28  Exp:11
It is a sharp-tailed bat, clouded in frost.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 18.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe frost; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and can eat
 bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through
 webs.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to freeze you for 1d3 damage.  

The Huge cockroach  (Teal 'I')
=== Num:1092  Lev:8  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:8  Ac:5  Exp:12
A cockroach the size of your head.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 8 and moves extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 19.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is hurt by bright light.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 60 feet.  It can crawl to infect you with disease for 2d1 damage.  

The Giant pink ant  (Magenta-Pink 'a')
=== Num:132  Lev:8  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:17  Ac:34  Exp:13
It is large and has venomous mandibles.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 21.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage and sting to reduce 
 strength and size from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Potion mimic  (White '!')
=== Num:224  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:30  Exp:13
A strange creature that disguises itself as a discarded potion bottle to lure
 unsuspecting adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 21.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 frost bolts, cause wounds, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 5.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 250 feet.  It may carry a special object or treasure.  It can hit to hurt and
 poison you for 3d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage and hit to hurt you 
 for 2d3 damage.  

The Giant tan bat  (Mud 'b')
=== Num:550  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:20  Exp:13
It is a giant bat, the beating of whose wings produces a strangely unnerving
 noise.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat
 erratically and very quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 21.27 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It must fly
 and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite
to terrify you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d2 damage and claw to hurt
you for 1d2 damage.  

The Hyena  (Mustard 'C')
=== Num:750  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:27  Ac:18  Exp:13
It is a large doglike creature with an oversize jaw.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 8 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 21.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 320 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d7 damage.  

The Large goblin  (Blue 'k')
=== Num:82  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:32  Exp:14
It a man-sized figure with the all too recognizable face of a goblin.  This
 evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at
 normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 22.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash
 down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible
 item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Goblin shaman  (Purple 'k')
=== Num:125  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:39  Ac:15  Exp:14
A goblin dressed in skins who gestures wildly.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc
 is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 22.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is
 magical, casting spells which produce mana bolts, cure-self, blink-self, cause
 wounds or incur heroism; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She is immune to 
 poison.  She resists darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, 
 garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you 
 for 1d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant flea  (Blue Slate 'I')
=== Num:180  Lev:8  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:16  Ac:25  Exp:14
It makes you itch just to look at it.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 8 and moves extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 22.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  
 It breeds explosively.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d2 damage.  

The Warg  (Teal 'C')
=== Num:186  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:35  Ac:20  Exp:14
It is a large wolf with eyes full of cunning.  Where there are wargs, there are
 sure to be orcs.  This evil animal is normally found on dungeon level 8 and
 moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 22.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which summon orcs; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land, but not through
 water.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  
 

The Giant black dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Light Dark 'I')
=== Num:231  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:20  Exp:14
The size of a large bird, this fly drips caustic acid.  This mix of dragon and 
 insect is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves extremely erratically
 and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 22.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It may breathe acid; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors.  It must
 fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to dissolve you for 1d3 damage.  

The Cave bear  (Blue Slate 'Q')
=== Num:563  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:35  Exp:14
A large bear appears to have made its home in this cave.  It is hungry, and you
 are trespassing in its territory.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 8 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 22.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is fairly observant
 of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for
 1d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d8 
 damage.  

The Faerie |master|mistress|masters|  (Green 'H')
=== Num:1341  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:58  Ac:24  Exp:14
A small winged humanoid that radiates some power.   This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is faster deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 22.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells which produce poison balls, blink-self, teleport-self, summon a monster
 , blind or slow; 1 time in 4.  She can open doors, easily evade blows and
 missiles and track you over land, but not through water.  She must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  She lights up the surroundings.  She
 resists lite.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from
 180 feet.  She may carry a garment, adornment, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  She has no physical attacks.  

The Green jell|y|y|ies|  (Green 'j')
=== Num:81  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:99  Ac:1  Exp:15
It is a large pile of pulsing green flesh.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and
 does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 24.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to acid.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch
to dissolve you for 1d2 damage.  

The Giant orange frog  (Orange 'F')
=== Num:818  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:16  Exp:15
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves
 a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 24.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It can bite to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The Giant brown locust  (Umber 'I')
=== Num:902  Lev:8  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:12  Ac:7  Exp:15
It voraciously eats and breeds leaving nothing in its wake.  This insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 24.55 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d2 
 damage and bite to eat your food.  

The Giant house fl|y|y|ies|  (Deep Light Blue 'I')
=== Num:918  Lev:8  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:13  Ac:16  Exp:15
A sickening pest.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 24.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to see intruders, which
 it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to infect you with disease for 1d2 
 damage.  

The Grey orc  (Slate 'o')
=== Num:1006  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:56  Ac:34  Exp:15
She is a vicious orc with a pale grey face.  This evil orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 24.55
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 may create a dagger to hurt you for 2d5 damage; 1 time in 6 and is also
 magical, casting spells which blink-self; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors, 
 bash down doors, pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water
 .  She resists darkness.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a 
 weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d5 damage.  

The Zombified goblin  (Mud 'z')
=== Num:106  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:14  Exp:16
It is an animated goblin corpse.  Flesh falls off in large chunks as it
 shambles forward.  This evil undead mix of dwarf and orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, more powerful
 or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 26.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt and poison you for 1d6 damage
 and hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Rot jell|y|y|ies|  (Mustard 'j')
=== Num:549  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:85  Ac:30  Exp:16
It is a large pile of rotting flesh, whose touch spoils your food.  The
 terrible smell it exudes is also very hard to get rid of...  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 26.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  
 It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It pays very little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  
 It can touch to eat your food for 2d3 damage and touch to reduce charisma from
you for 2d3 damage.  

The Giant ebony ant  (Light Dark 'a')
=== Num:690  Lev:8  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:64  Ac:24  Exp:16
It is large and has venomous mandibles.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 26.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It
 resists edged weapons.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for
 2d3 damage.  

The Metallic black centipede  (Light Dark 'c')
=== Num:743  Lev:8  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:10  Exp:16
It is about five feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 26.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 80 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d3 
 damage and sting to reduce intelligence from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Sea snake  (Light Teal 'J')
=== Num:940  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:32  Exp:16
It has glistening blue skin, a sinuous body and venomous fangs.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat erratically at normal
 speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 26.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 swim under water.  It is immune to poison.  It is vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d4 
 damage.  

The Forest orc  (Light Green 'o')
=== Num:1004  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:57  Ac:32  Exp:16
A primitive forest-dwelling orc.  This evil orc is normally found on dungeon
 level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 26.18 points for a
 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a
 dart to hurt you for 2d5 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors, bash down
 doors, pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  She is
 immune to poison.  She resists darkness.  She takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, 
 junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage and bite to 
 hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Novice paladin  (White 'p')
=== Num:118  Lev:8  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:16  Exp:17
An adventurer both devoutly religious and skillful in combat.  This woman
 warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed.
A kill of this creature is worth 27.82 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is dangerous at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which 
 heal-self, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 8.  She can open doors and bash
 down doors.  She always carries a lite to see you.  She is observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She may carry a weapon, armour, garment, lite, adornment, written item, potion, 
 edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d9 damage and hit to 
 hurt you for 1d9 damage.  

The Zombified orc  (Mustard 'z')
=== Num:153  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:47  Ac:24  Exp:17
It is a shambling orcish corpse leaving behind a trail of flesh.  This evil
 undead orc is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger, faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 27.82 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  
 It resists darkness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit
to hurt you for 1d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d4 damage and hit to hurt you 
 for 1d4 damage.  

The Gnome warrior  (Umber 'h')
=== Num:876  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:17
A warrior of short stature.  This evil dwarf warrior is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 27.82 points for a
 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She can open
 doors and bash down doors.  She cannot be slowed or paralyzed.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 180 feet.  She may carry one
 or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items
 , potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage
 and hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Disenchanter ooze  (Light Purple 'j')
=== Num:932  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:53  Ac:15  Exp:17
It's disenchanted and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 8 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 27.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to
 regain strength, pick up objects, ooze through tiny cracks and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists disenchantment, blindness, 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 150 feet.  It may carry an adornment, potion, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can touch to disenchant your armour and weapons.  

The Mindcrafter  (Yellow 'q')
=== Num:1332  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:39  Ac:15  Exp:17
A master of the mental arts, able to damage or dominate the minds of others.   
 This evil woman mage is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal
 speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 27.82 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening
 at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which blink-self, cause
 mind blasting, summon a monster, blind, confuse, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 4
 .  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  She needs
 lite to see you.  She is rarely detected by telepathy.  She takes a while to
 see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, 
 garment, lite, adornment, magical device, written item, potion, edible item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The Yeti  (White 'Y')
=== Num:122  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:53  Ac:24  Exp:18
A large white figure covered in shaggy fur.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 29.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to cold.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can claw
to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt 
 you for 1d4 damage.  

The Bloodshot icky thing  (Light Pink 'i')
=== Num:123  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:30  Ac:18  Exp:18
It is a strange, slimy, icky creature.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 29.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 11.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It takes a while to see intruders, which
 it may notice from 140 feet.  It can touch to hurt you for 1d4 damage and 
 crawl to dissolve you for 2d4 damage.  

The Flesh golem  (Light Red 'g')
=== Num:185  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:51  Ac:30  Exp:18
A shambling humanoid monster with long scars.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 29.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 lightning.  It cannot be frightened or confused.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Warty mold  (Light Teal 'm')
=== Num:979  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:92  Ac:14  Exp:18
It is a strange warty growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 29.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.
It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It has no
 physical attacks.  

The Rabid goblin  (Teal 'k')
=== Num:1093  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:32  Ac:20  Exp:18
A small goblin foaming at the mouth.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is
 normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 29.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a 
 weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can bite to infect you with disease for 2d3 damage and hit to 
 hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Hill orc  (Umber 'o')
=== Num:120  Lev:8  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:32  Exp:19
She is a hardy well-weathered survivor.  This evil orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 31.09
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  She resists darkness.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a 
 weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d13 damage.  

The Unseen servant  (Yellow 'E')
=== Num:801  Lev:8  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:38  Ac:28  Exp:19
It is impossible to define its form but it impends your progress.  This evil
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 8 and moves somewhat erratically
 at normal speed, but is faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 31.09 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It can open doors.  It is invisible.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, 
 lightning and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

[U] the Dunlending Agent of the Nazgul  (Light Blue 't')
=== Num:111  Lev:8  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:235  Ac:30  Exp:100
A squint-eyed southerner working with Bill Ferny as a spy in Bree.  He is an
 outlaw driven from Dunland, where many said that he had orc-blood in him. 
 Originally a servant of Saruman in the Shire, he betrayed his master when
 interrogated on the road by the Lord of the Nazgul.  He was then sent to Bree
 as a spy in their service.  This evil mix of man and orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 8 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth
 163.64 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.
He is magical, casting spells which produce poison balls, produce frost bolts, 
 heal-self, create traps or slow; 1 time in 5.  He can carry a lite to see you, 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  
 He takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may
 carry one or two exceptional weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, 
 musical items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage
 , hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage and touch to steal gold from you.  It is a
 dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Clear worm mass|||es|  (White 'w')
=== Num:66  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:10  Ac:1  Exp:1
It is a disgusting mass of poisonous worms.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 9 and moves extremely erratically and slowly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.73 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It is invisible.
It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by 
 bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 70
 feet.  It can crawl to poison you for 1d2 damage.  

The Faerie ring  (Light Pink ',')
=== Num:1305  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:30  Ac:10  Exp:1
It is a ring of tasty looking mushrooms, glowing with an unusual light.  There
 might be something valuable inside.  This plant is normally found on dungeon
 level 9 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1.73 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which recover mana or summon monsters of the same group
 ; 1 time in 1.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands
 .  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It prefers to ignore
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears with escorts.
It may carry a good special object or treasure.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Giant brown rat  (Light Umber 'r')
=== Num:1041  Lev:9  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:8  Ac:22  Exp:9
It is a rodent of unusual size.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 9 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 15.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It breeds explosively.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite
to hurt and poison you for 2d4 damage.  

The Grey ooze  (Light Slate 'j')
=== Num:933  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:10  Exp:14
It's cold and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 9
 and moves extremely erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 24.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  ; 1 time in 7.  It can can
 eat bodies to regain strength, pick up objects, ooze through tiny cracks and 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is very observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It may carry an adornment, 
 potion, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to freeze you for 2d6 damage.  

The Chimpanzee  (Mud 'Y')
=== Num:1076  Lev:9  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:24  Ac:13  Exp:15
A squat, woman-like ape covered with fur.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 25.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a shot to 
 hurt you for 1d5 damage; 1 time in 7.  She can bash down doors, pick up objects
 and track you over land, but not through water.  She is observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 150 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She can hit to hurt you for 2d7 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Giant speckled tree frog  (Light Green 'F')
=== Num:823  Lev:9  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:13  Ac:16  Exp:16
It is as big as a wolf.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 9 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 27.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It
 may spit to slow you; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, climb on walls and ceilings and swim under water.  It breeds
 explosively.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d3 damage and spit to slow you.  

The Mountain orc  (Violet 'o')
=== Num:1003  Lev:9  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:32  Exp:16
An agile but primitive orc with large dangerous claws.  This evil orc is
 normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 27.64 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She may create a shot to hurt you for 3d5 damage; 1 time in 5.  
 She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects, climb on walls and
 ceilings and track you over land, but not through water.  She resists darkness
 .  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, 
 armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can claw to 
 hurt you for 1d6 damage and claw to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant salamander  (Yellow 'R')
=== Num:115  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:23  Ac:40  Exp:17
A large black and yellow lizard.  You'd better run away!  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.
A kill of this creature is worth 29.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength, 
 swim under water and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to fire.  It is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It
 can bite to burn you for 3d6 damage.  

The Giant silver dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Light Slate 'I')
=== Num:910  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:30  Ac:20  Exp:17
This gleaming silver dragonfly has wings which hum a terrifying dirge.  This
 mix of dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 29.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe fear; 1 time in 7.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be 
 frightened.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It may carry a precious metal.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.


The Creeping silver coins||||  (Slate '$')
=== Num:95  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:51  Ac:30  Exp:18
It appears to be a pile of silver coins.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 9 and moves slowly.  A kill of this creature is worth 31.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 40 feet.  It may carry up to 3 precious metals.  It can hit to 
 batter you for 2d6 damage and touch to remove enchantments from you.  

The Scroll mimic  (White '?')
=== Num:251  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:69  Ac:40  Exp:19
A strange creature that disguises itself as a discarded scroll to lure
 unsuspecting adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 32.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 fire bolts, summon a monster, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 5.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may
 notice from 300 feet.  It may carry a special object or treasure.  It can hit 
 to poison you for 3d4 damage, hit to poison you for 3d4 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 2d3 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage.  

The Rotting corpse  (Light Red 'z')
=== Num:1326  Lev:9  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:35  Ac:20  Exp:19
Corpses awakened from their sleep by dark sorcery.   This evil undead creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 32.82 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors
 and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can claw to hurt and poison you for
 1d3 damage and claw to hurt and poison you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant white tick  (White 'S')
=== Num:141  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:-10  Hp:50  Ac:40  Exp:20
It is moving slowly towards you.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 9 and moves slowly.  A kill of this creature is worth 34.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It takes
 a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to 
 slow you for 2d6 damage.  

The Nighthawk  (Deep Light Blue 'B')
=== Num:598  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:35  Ac:25  Exp:20
Trained to hunt and kill without fear.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 9 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 34.55 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain
 strength.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It resists 
 darkness.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and peck to wound you for 1d4 damage.  

The Nexus eye  (Blue Slate 'e')
=== Num:792  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:67  Ac:6  Exp:20
A disembodied eye, warped inside out.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 34.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It may gaze to blast you with nexus for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 7 and is
 also magical, casting spells which blink-self, teleport-self to or drain mana;
 1 time in 7.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must
 fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  
 It resists nexus.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to blast you with
 nexus for 5d6 damage.  

The Giant sapphire frog  (Light Blue 'F')
=== Num:817  Lev:9  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:18  Ac:12  Exp:20
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves
 a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 34.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  It
 breeds explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The Dwarven warrior  (Light Umber 'h')
=== Num:881  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:30  Exp:20
A dwarven warrior with a three-foot beard.  This dwarf warrior is normally
 found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 34.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She can 
 open doors and bash down doors.  She resists blindness.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 180 feet.  She may carry one
 or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items
 , potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage
 and hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Giant mayfly  (Light Violet 'I')
=== Num:917  Lev:9  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:15  Ac:14  Exp:20
An annoying pest.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 34.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to see intruders, which
 it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant white jellyfish  (White 'j')
=== Num:1255  Lev:9  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:36  Ac:1  Exp:20
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing white lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 34.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must
 swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can touch to poison you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant blue jellyfish  (Blue 'j')
=== Num:1258  Lev:9  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:54  Ac:1  Exp:20
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing blue lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 34.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 pays very little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can touch to freeze you for 1d6 damage.  

The Cheerful leprechaun  (Light Green 'h')
=== Num:1349  Lev:9  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:6  Ac:6  Exp:20
A merry little gnome.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 9 and
 moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 34.55 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native
 depth.  He is magical, casting spells which blink-self; 1 time in 7.  He can 
 open doors.  He breeds explosively.  He is fairly observant of intruders,
 which he may notice from 80 feet.  He may carry a treasure.  He can touch to 
 steal gold from you and touch to eat your food.  

The Giant copper dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Umber 'I')
=== Num:909  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:30  Ac:20  Exp:21
This gleaming copper dragonfly is never in the same place twice.  This mix of 
 dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves extremely
 erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 36.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It may breathe nexus; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down
 doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning.  It resists nexus.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry
 a precious metal.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant diamond dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (White 'I')
=== Num:913  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:39  Ac:20  Exp:21
This clear diamond dragonfly has wings which glow with magical energy.  This
 mix of dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 36.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe mana; 1 time in 7.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It resists magical
 spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry a gem stone.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Black lizard  (Light Dark 'R')
=== Num:1047  Lev:9  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:32  Exp:21
It is a deep black lizard with large overlapping scales and a poisonous bite.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 36.27 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can can
 eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  
 It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 damage and bite to hurt and poison 
 you for 1d6 damage.  

The Animated dagger  (Slate '|')
=== Num:1185  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:24  Ac:15  Exp:21
Nasty little animated daggers looking for warm meat.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 9 and moves quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 36.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which teleport-self to; 1 time in 10.  It can fly over obstacles.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and 
 poison.  It resists water, nether, nexus, blindness and chaos.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It usually appears with a
 friend.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It can hit to 
 wound you for 1d4 damage.  

The Red icky thing  (Red 'i')
=== Num:899  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:18  Ac:18  Exp:22
It is a smallish, slimy, icky, pestilent creature.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 9 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 38.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can touch to hurt you for
 1d3 damage and touch to dissolve you for 1d5 damage.  

The Violet mold  (Violet 'm')
=== Num:983  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:74  Ac:15  Exp:22
It is a strange violet growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 38.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 9.  It can 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot
 be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to paralyze you for
 1d2 damage.  

The Dark naga  (Violet 'n')
=== Num:1046  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:91  Ac:30  Exp:22
A giant snake-like figure with a woman's torso.  Not as strong as other nagas,
 but more talented in magic.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 9 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 38.00 points for a
 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells which produce frost bolts, recover mana, heal-self, create
 darkness, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  She can bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  She is not detected by telepathy.  She tends to overlook
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a written item, 
 potion or treasure.  She can crush to hurt you for 1d5 damage and bite to hurt
you for 1d5 damage.  

The Silver jell|y|y|ies|  (Light Slate 'j')
=== Num:59  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:45  Ac:1  Exp:23
It is a large pile of silver flesh that sucks all light from its surroundings.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 39.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  ; 1 time in 16 and is also magical, casting
 spells which drain mana; 1 time in 16.  It can communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  
 It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to absorb light from you for 1d3 
 damage and touch to absorb light from you for 1d3 damage.  

The Killer brown beetle  (Umber 'K')
=== Num:172  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:54  Ac:40  Exp:23
It is a vicious insect with a tough carapace.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 39.73 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 3d5 
 damage.  

The Maggoty moss|||es|  (Mud ';')
=== Num:672  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:23
A mass of grey vegetation. Maggots writhe among its long dead fronds.  This
 undead plant is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 39.73 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 give invisibility or summon an undead; 1 time in 2.  It is cold blooded.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can hit to 
 drain experience (by 10d6+) from you for 1d4 damage and hit to drain 
 experience (by 10d6+) from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Rolling eye  (Mustard 'e')
=== Num:787  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:17  Ac:6  Exp:23
A disembodied eye, that quickly rolls its away around the dungeon.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves quickly, but is larger
 or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 39.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 gaze to paralyze you; 1 time in 7.  It can communicate telepathically with its
 own kind.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to 
 paralyze you.  

The Giant yellow frog  (Yellow 'F')
=== Num:820  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:30  Ac:24  Exp:23
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves
 a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 39.73
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 5d4 damage.  

The Dull grey ooze  (Slate 'j')
=== Num:929  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:45  Ac:6  Exp:23
It's grey and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 9
 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 39.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which drain mana or cause mind blasting; 1 time in 11.  It can bash
 down doors, ooze through tiny cracks and communicate telepathically with its
 own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It may carry an
adornment, potion, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to dissolve you for 2d6 
 damage.  

The Giant red frog  (Red 'F')
=== Num:812  Lev:9  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:26  Ac:20  Exp:24
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves
 a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 41.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 may spit to reduce strength and size from you for 1d4 damage; 1 time in 7.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can 
 bite to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage and spit to reduce strength and
 size from you for 1d4 damage.  

[U] Smeagol  (Light Pink 'h')
=== Num:52  Lev:9  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:118  Ac:12  Exp:41
Usually known as Gollum.  He's been sneaking, and he wants his 'precious.'  
 This evil thief is normally found on dungeon level 9 and moves extremely
 erratically and very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 70.82 points for
 a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical,
 casting spells which give invisibility; 1 time in 3.  He can open doors, pick
 up objects, climb on walls and ceilings, hide in unusual places and easily
 evade blows and missiles.  He is observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 200 feet.  He may carry a exceptional weapon, missile weapon, armour, 
 garment, tool, lite, written item, potion, edible item or treasure.  He can 
 touch to steal gold from you for 1d4 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian,
 impeding your progress further.  

[U] Golfimbul, the Goblin King of Mount Gram  (Light Blue 'k')
=== Num:137  Lev:9  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:116  Ac:20  Exp:140
A powerful goblin king.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 9 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 241.82
 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which recover mana, heal-self, 
 blink-self, teleport to, summon a monster, confuse or slow; 1 time in 4.  He
 can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  He is hurt by bright light.  He is immune to poison.  He resists darkness.  
 He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 180 feet.  He
 usually appears with escorts.  He may carry a good weapon, missile weapon, 
 armour, garment, tool, edible item or junk item.  He can hit to hurt you for
 1d9 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Gnome academic  (Magenta-Pink 'h')
=== Num:202  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:30  Ac:20  Exp:3
An academic of short stature.  This evil dwarf is normally found on dungeon
 level 10 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce frost bolts, produce mana bolts, recover
 mana, blink-self, create darkness or summon a monster; 1 time in 4.  She can 
 open doors.  She cannot be slowed or paralyzed.  She takes a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, lite, written
 item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage
 .  

The Novice shaman  (Purple 'p')
=== Num:1020  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:6  Exp:3
She waves a magical talisman at you.  This woman shaman is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 5.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells which produce mana bolts, heal-self, 
 blink-self, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors.  She
 always carries a lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which
 she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a
weapon, armour, garment, lite, adornment, written item, potion, edible item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to batter you for 1d6 damage.  

The Green goblin  (Green 'k')
=== Num:942  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:38  Ac:32  Exp:7
She is an ugly, green skinned humanoid armed with a bow.  This evil mix of 
 dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 12.73 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 challenging at her native depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 3d6 
 damage; 1 time in 7.  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  She is immune to poison.  She
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, 
 garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you 
 for 1d8 damage.  

The Giant clear centipede  (White 'c')
=== Num:197  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:21  Ac:30  Exp:10
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 18.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is invisible.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 120 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d4 
 damage and sting to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Novice archer  (White 't')
=== Num:1189  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:8  Exp:11
A nasty little lass with a bow and arrow.  This woman archer is normally found 
 on dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 20.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native
 depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 3d6 damage; 1 time in 2.  She
 can open doors and pick up objects.  She takes a while to see intruders, which
 she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a
treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d5 
 damage.  

The Black ooze  (Light Dark 'j')
=== Num:260  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:-10  Hp:27  Ac:6  Exp:13
A strange, inky puddle creeping around the dungeon floor.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves somewhat erratically and slowly,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 23.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 11.  It can bash down doors
 , can eat bodies to regain strength, pick up objects, ooze through tiny cracks
 and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened.  It is vigilant for intruders, which it
 may notice from 100 feet.  It may carry an adornment, potion, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can touch to dissolve you for 2d4 damage.  

The Silver dragon bat  (White 'b')
=== Num:728  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:17  Ac:28  Exp:13
It is a sharp-tailed bat, clouded in frost.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 23.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe frost or fear; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.
It is immune to cold.  It cannot be frightened.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to freeze you for 1d3 damage.  

The Discharger eye  (Purple 'e')
=== Num:790  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:45  Ac:6  Exp:13
A disembodied eye, charged with power.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 23.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It may gaze to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 4d6 damage
 ; 1 time in 7 and is also magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 7
 .  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It
 cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to drain charges from your wands and staffs 
 for 4d6 damage.  

The Giant ship rat  (Blue 'r')
=== Num:1042  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:22  Exp:13
It is a rodent of unusual size.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 10 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 23.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  It
 breeds explosively.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d5 damage.  

The Stormcrow  (Light Yellow 'B')
=== Num:1192  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:77  Ac:20  Exp:17
From the vast Plains of Air come these shimmering avian beings; as they beat
 their wings, terrible winds rise up and buffet you.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 10 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 30.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which produce wind balls or produce cone of force; 1 time in 1.  It can bash
 down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is
 rarely detected by telepathy.  It resists water, nexus and teleportation.  It
 cannot be stunned or confused.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 250 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can peck to wound
you for 1d4 damage.  

The Black dragon bat  (Light Dark 'b')
=== Num:725  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:28  Exp:19
It is a sharp-tailed bat, dripping in acid.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 34.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe acid; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It is immune to acid.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to dissolve you for 1d3 damage.  

The Mirkwood goblin  (Light Teal 'k')
=== Num:944  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:46  Ac:32  Exp:19
She is an ugly, brown skinned humanoid armed with a variety of dangerous
 weapons.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon level 10
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 34.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create an arrow to 
 hurt you for 3d6 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors, bash down doors, 
 climb on walls and ceilings and track you over land, but not through water.  
 She is immune to poison.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a 
 weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to hurt and poison you for 2d5 damage.  

The Ogre  (Light Slate 'O')
=== Num:174  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:33  Exp:21
A hideous, smallish giant that is often found near or with orcs.  This evil mix
 of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 38.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It may carry a chest, weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 2d8 damage.  

The Giant blue termite  (Blue 'a')
=== Num:322  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:33  Ac:50  Exp:21
It looks like an ant, but with shorter legs and bigger fangs. It has a blue
 exoskeleton that crackles with energy.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 38.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It lights up the surroundings.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to electrify you for 4d4 damage.  

The Lightningjaw  (Light Blue 'J')
=== Num:1138  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:48  Ac:20  Exp:21
It is a snake of pure electricity; the union of force and magic.  It attacks
 everything in sight; the very walls are blackened by its fury.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 38.18
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which produce lightening beams or teleport-self to; 1
 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to electrify you for 2d4 damage.  

The Poltergeist  (Light Slate 'G')
=== Num:54  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+20  Hp:6  Ac:15  Exp:22
It is a ghastly, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves extremely erratically and very quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 40.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which blink-self or animate
 monsters from objects; 1 time in 16.  It can pass through walls, pick up
 objects and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It may carry one or two garments
 , tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can touch to terrify you.


The Bilge rat  (Light Blue 'r')
=== Num:1068  Lev:10  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:17  Ac:7  Exp:22
A highly aggressive swarming rodent with greasy flea-bitten fur and outsized
 incisors.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 40.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim
 under water.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can 
 bite to infect you with disease for 2d6 damage.  

The Wood elf mage  (Red 'l')
=== Num:136  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:37  Ac:16  Exp:23
A elven figure, hurling spells at you.  This elf mage is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 41.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells which produce poison balls, produce balls of light, produce mana bolts, 
 recover mana, cause hunger, blind or confuse; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors
 and bash down doors.  She lights up the surroundings.  She resists lite.  She
 takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may
 carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, 
 written items, musical items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt 
 you for 1d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Priest||ess|s|  (Light Blue 'p')
=== Num:161  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:22  Exp:23
A robed woman, dedicated to her godesss  This evil woman priest is normally
 found on dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 41.82 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce balls of light, produce
 holy orbs, heal-self, cure-self, cause wounds, incur heroism, summon a monster
 or terrify; 1 time in 2.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash
 down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  She takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two 
 weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, potions, edible
 items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage and hit to hurt 
 you for 2d3 damage.  

The Dire wol|f|f|ves|  (Orange 'C')
=== Num:753  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:63  Ac:30  Exp:23
It is a huge wolf with eyes that glow red with cunning.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but
 is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 41.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant teal toad  (Teal 'F')
=== Num:824  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:26  Ac:24  Exp:23
It is ugly and covered in warts.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 10 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 41.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It may spit to slow you for 2d4 damage; 1 time in 7 and is also
 magical, casting spells which blink-self, create darkness, terrify or slow; 1
 time in 7.  It can bash down doors and swim under water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  
 It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage and spit to slow you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The Killer dung beetle  (Mud 'K')
=== Num:947  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:66  Ac:45  Exp:23
It is a vicious insect with a tough carapace.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 41.82 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d4 
 damage.  

The Dead fl|y|y|ies|  (Mustard 'I')
=== Num:1288  Lev:10  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:10  Ac:7  Exp:23
It makes you feel like your life is slipping through your fingers just to look
 at it.  This evil undead insect is normally found on dungeon level 10 and
 moves somewhat erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 41.82 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.
It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d2 damage.  

The Hunting hawk  (Mud 'B')
=== Num:1328  Lev:10  Rar:1  Spd:+10  Hp:35  Ac:25  Exp:23
Trained to hunt and kill without fear.   This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster or older deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 41.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can fly over obstacles.
It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 300 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Spotted jell|y|y|ies|  (Blue Slate 'j')
=== Num:170  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:56  Ac:18  Exp:24
A strange jelly thing, covered in discoloured blotches.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 43.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is
 immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It can touch to dissolve you for 6d6 damage.  

The Water hound  (Light Teal 'Z')
=== Num:1080  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:49  Ac:30  Exp:24
Liquid footprints follow this hound as it pads around the dungeon.  It has fins
 and a fish tail.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves
 at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 43.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors, swim under water and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is hurt by water remover.  It
 resists water.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage and claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage.  

The Giant garnet dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Light Red 'I')
=== Num:1235  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:39  Ac:20  Exp:24
This pink garnet dragonfly has wings which glow with fecund energy.  This mix of
dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves extremely
 erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 43.64 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 disease; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It resists 
 teleportation.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It may carry a gem stone.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Bandit  (Red 't')
=== Num:121  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:72  Ac:24  Exp:25
She is after your cash!  This evil woman thief is normally found on dungeon
 level 10 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 45.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She may create a shot to 
 hurt you for 3d5 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can carry a lite to see you, open
 doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and hide in unusual places.  She needs
 lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, 
 tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 2d5 damage and touch to steal gold from you.  

The Mischievous moss|||es|  (Light Blue ';')
=== Num:670  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:25
A mass of bright blue vegetation. It wiggles its tiny fronds in mischevious
 anticipation.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase
 intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 45.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which blink-self, give invisibility, create darkness, terrify or slow;
 1 time in 4.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 300 feet.  It can hit to confuse you for 1d4 damage and hit to 
 confuse you for 1d4 damage.  

The Blue mold  (Blue 'm')
=== Num:976  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:66  Ac:12  Exp:25
A strange blue growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 45.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  ; 1
 time in 4.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists blindness
 .  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays
 very little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can 
 touch to freeze you for 1d6 damage.  

The Flying monkey  (Light Purple 'Y')
=== Num:1295  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:32  Ac:60  Exp:25
It is a monkey with wings!  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 10
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 45.45 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may create a shot 
 to hurt you for 1d5 damage or shriek to do you no effect; 1 time in 7.  It can 
 open doors, pick up objects, fly over obstacles, easily evade blows and
 missiles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage and shriek to do you no
 effect.  

The Barracuda  (Blue 'F')
=== Num:1321  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:25  Ac:45  Exp:26
A predatory fish with razor-sharp teeth.   This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 47.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It must swim and cannot move out of water.  
 It is cold blooded.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d10 damage and bite to hurt you 
 for 1d10 damage.  

The King cobra  (Purple 'J')
=== Num:134  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:42  Ac:30  Exp:27
It is a large snake with a hooded face.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 49.09 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 spit to blind you for 1d2 damage, doubled against eye monsters; 1 time in 4.  
 It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage and spit to blind you for 1d2 
 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Giant copper ant  (Umber 'a')
=== Num:682  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:34  Exp:27
It is large and has a dangerous sting.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 49.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 acid.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 usually appears with a friend.  It may carry a precious metal.  It can bite to
hurt you for 2d4 damage and sting to electrify you for 2d4 damage.  

The Metallic yellow centipede  (Yellow 'c')
=== Num:739  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:18  Ac:10  Exp:27
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 49.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 70 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d4 
 damage and sting to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Night goblin  (Deep Light Blue 'k')
=== Num:943  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:32  Exp:27
She is an ugly, night blue skinned humanoid armed with a wicked looking knife.  
 This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves
 at normal speed, but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 49.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a dagger to 
 hurt you for 2d5 damage; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors, bash down doors, 
 pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  She is hurt
 by bright light.  She is immune to poison.  She resists darkness.  She takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, 
 garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to blind you 
 for 2d5 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Killer green beetle  (Green 'K')
=== Num:957  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:66  Ac:45  Exp:27
It is looking for prey.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 10 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 49.09 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 4d4 damage.  

The Giant cockroach  (Light Pink 'I')
=== Num:1094  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:18  Ac:10  Exp:27
A cockroach the size of a small dog.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 10 and moves extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 49.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is hurt by bright light.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 70 feet.  It can crawl to infect you with disease for 2d2 damage.  

The Spectral warrior  (Mud 'G')
=== Num:1329  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:10  Exp:27
Spectral creatures that are half real, half illusion.   This warrior is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 49.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can pass through walls and fly over
 obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists 
 nether.  It cannot be frightened, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d11 damage and hit to hurt you for
 1d11 damage.  

The Mine-dog  (Light Purple 'C')
=== Num:1339  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:20  Ac:30  Exp:27
This animal is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves somewhat
 erratically and quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 49.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may hurts you for 6d6 damage.  It can bash
 down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It can hurts you for 6d6 damage.  

The Wolfhound  (Blue Slate 'C')
=== Num:1348  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:44  Ac:20  Exp:27
Well-trained watchdogs, obedient to death.   This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 49.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It cannot be frightened.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage and bite to hurt 
 you for 1d5 damage.  

The Dwarven ranger  (Light Slate 'h')
=== Num:882  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:53  Ac:24  Exp:28
A dwarven ranger with a three-foot beard, and sword and bow quick to hand.  
 This dwarf is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves quickly, but is 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 50.91 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 3d6 damage; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce mana
 bolts or blind; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors and bash down doors.  She
 resists blindness.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, lites, written items, potions or edible items.  She can hit 
 to hurt you for 1d7 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage.  

The Skeletal rat  (Light Yellow 'r')
=== Num:1291  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:24  Exp:28
It is a skeletal rodent of unusual bone structure.  This evil undead animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 50.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to poison you 
 for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 6.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists blindness
 and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite
to wound you for 2d6 damage and spit to poison you for 2d6 damage.  

The Kamikaze faerie  (Light Purple 'H')
=== Num:1335  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+3  Hp:10  Ac:18  Exp:28
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves quickly, but is 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 50.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may 
 hurts you for 15d2 damage; 1 time in 10.  It can easily evade blows and
 missiles and track you over land, but not through water.  It must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  It lights up the surroundings.  It
 resists lite.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 180 feet.  It can hurts you for 15d2 damage.  

The Pink naga  (Magenta-Pink 'n')
=== Num:102  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:46  Ac:40  Exp:29
A large pink snake with a woman's torso.  This evil creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 10 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 52.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She can 
 bash down doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  She pays very little
 attention to intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a 
 written item, potion or treasure.  She can crush to hurt you for 1d10 damage
 and bite to reduce strength and size from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant brown toad  (Umber 'F')
=== Num:825  Lev:10  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:30  Ac:28  Exp:29
It is ugly and covered in big brown warts.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 52.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to reduce charisma from you for
 2d4 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which haste-self, 
 heal-self, summon a monster, terrify or blind; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors and swim under water.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to reduce charisma
 from you for 3d4 damage and spit to reduce charisma from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Giant tse-tse fl|y|y|ies|  (Purple 'I')
=== Num:1095  Lev:10  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:15  Ac:15  Exp:30
It spreads malaria across the dungeon.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 54.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its
 native depth.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is
 rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It cannot be charmed or 
 slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100
 feet.  It can sting to infect you with disease for 1d2 damage.  

[U] Hama, Doorwarden of the Golden Hall  (Light Yellow 't')
=== Num:1310  Lev:10  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:343  Ac:10  Exp:80
A majordomo of Theoden and captain of the guard, he requests you put aside your
 weapons before entering the Golden Hall.  This man is normally found on
 dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth
 145.45 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.
He can open doors and bash down doors.  He always carries a lite to see you.  
 He is very observant of intruders, which he may notice from 400 feet.  He may
 carry a good weapon, garment, tool, lite, adornment, musical item, potion or 
 edible item.  He can hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage and hit to wound you for
 1d3 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Lagduf, the Snaga of Cirith Ungol  (Light Yellow 'k')
=== Num:112  Lev:10  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:178  Ac:32  Exp:150
A captain of a regiment of weaker orcs, Lagduf keeps his troop in order with
 displays of excessive violence.  This evil orc is normally found on dungeon
 level 10 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 272.73
 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He
 can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  He takes quite a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.
He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile
 weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to 
 hurt you for 1d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage, hit to hurt you for
 1d9 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d9 damage.  

[U] Muzgash, the Snaga of Cirith Ungol  (Light Dark 'k')
=== Num:623  Lev:10  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:225  Ac:32  Exp:150
A friend of Lagduf's, he is no less evil but larger and  more cunning.   This
 evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 10 and moves at normal speed.  
 Killing this creature is worth 272.73 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 deadly at his native depth.  He can open doors, bash down doors and track you
 over land, but not through water.  He takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may
 carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, 
 edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 2d10 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 2d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d9 damage and hit to hurt you 
 for 2d9 damage.  

The Light hound  (Light Yellow 'Z')
=== Num:193  Lev:11  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:20  Ac:30  Exp:3
A brilliant canine form whose light hurts your eyes, even at this distance.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.73
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 may breathe light; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It lights up the surroundings.  
 It resists lite.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage.  

The Dark hound  (Light Dark 'Z')
=== Num:194  Lev:11  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:20  Ac:30  Exp:3
A hole in the air in the shape of a huge hound.  No light falls upon its form.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 5.73
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 may breathe darkness; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It resists darkness.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant pink |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Magenta-Pink 'r')
=== Num:1038  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:4  Ac:4  Exp:6
It is about three feet long with large teeth.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 11 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 11.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It breeds explosively.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to reduce 
 strength and size from you for 1d2 damage.  

The Copper dragon bat  (Umber 'b')
=== Num:726  Lev:11  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:28  Exp:11
It is a sharp-tailed bat, crackling with electricity.  This mix of animal and 
 dragon is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves somewhat erratically
 and very quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 21.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe lightning or nexus; 1 time in 4.  It can bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It is
 immune to lightning.  It resists nexus.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to 
 electrify you for 1d3 damage.  

The Pink mushroom patch|||es|  (Magenta-Pink ',')
=== Num:646  Lev:11  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:7  Ac:1  Exp:12
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 11
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 22.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may release
 spores to reduce strength and size from you for 1d4 damage and may grow
 ammunition; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds
 explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 20 feet.  It may carry one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores to reduce 
 strength and size from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant pink centipede  (Magenta-Pink 'c')
=== Num:740  Lev:11  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:10  Exp:13
It is about four feet long and carnivorous.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 11 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 24.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 70 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d3 
 damage and sting to reduce strength and size from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Gremlin  (Umber 'u')
=== Num:1330  Lev:11  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:15  Ac:30  Exp:25
Don't feed them after midnight!   This evil demon is normally found on dungeon
 level 11 and moves at normal speed.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 47.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It
 can open doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  It breeds explosively.  
 It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It resists magical spells
 and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can claw to eat your food for 1d2 
 damage, claw to eat your food for 1d2 damage and bite to eat your food for 1d3 
 damage.  

The Owlbear  (Blue Slate 'H')
=== Num:1336  Lev:11  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:75  Ac:20  Exp:27
A bizarre bear-creature with the claws and the face of an owl.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 51.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a 
 treasure.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage and peck to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Giant green locust  (Light Green 'I')
=== Num:903  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:15  Ac:7  Exp:28
It voraciously eats and breeds leaving nothing in its wake.  This insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.
A kill of this creature is worth 53.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It can bite 
 to hurt and poison you for 1d2 damage and bite to eat your food.  

The Door mimic  (Light Umber '+')
=== Num:1356  Lev:11  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:30  Exp:28
A strange creature that disguises itself as a door to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.   This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 53.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 acid bolts, produce fire bolts, cause wounds, terrify, blind or confuse; 1
 time in 5.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It can bite 
 to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage, bite to confuse you for 2d3 damage and 
 bite to paralyze you for 2d3 damage.  

The Illusionist  (Blue 'q')
=== Num:176  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:106  Ac:10  Exp:29
A deceptive spell caster.  This evil woman mage is normally found on dungeon
 level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 55.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which haste-self, recover mana, blink-self, teleport-self
 , give invisibility, create darkness, cause hallucinations, blind, confuse, 
 slow or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  She can carry a lite to see you and open doors
 .  She needs lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, magical devices, written items, potions, edible items or treasures
 .  She can hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage.  

The Giant gold ant  (Yellow 'a')
=== Num:684  Lev:11  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:51  Ac:34  Exp:29
It is large and has a dangerous sting.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 55.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 120 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It may carry a precious metal.  
 It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage and sting to hurt you for 6d2 damage.  

The Grey naga  (Slate 'n')
=== Num:985  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:42  Ac:40  Exp:29
A large grey serpent with a female's torso.  Her grey skin glistens with poison.
This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 55.36 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 threatening at her native depth.  She may spit to poison you for 2d8 damage; 1
 time in 9 and is also magical, casting spells which create darkness; 1 time in
 9.  She can bash down doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  She is
 immune to poison.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which she may
 notice from 190 feet.  She may carry a written item, potion or treasure.  She
 can crush to hurt you for 1d8 damage and spit to poison you for 2d8 damage.  

The Ghostly bat  (Light Yellow 'b')
=== Num:1116  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:10  Ac:10  Exp:29
Ghostly, shimmering apparitions materializing out of solid wall.  This animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 55.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can pass through walls
 and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison and blunt weapons.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Hairy mold  (Orange 'm')
=== Num:142  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:65  Ac:15  Exp:30
It is a strange hairy growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 57.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.
It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It has no
 physical attacks.  

The White wol|f|f|ves|  (White 'C')
=== Num:156  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:27  Ac:30  Exp:30
A large and muscled wolf from the northern wastes.  Its breath is cold and icy
 and its fur coated in frost.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 11
 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 57.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can
 eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to cold.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite
to hurt you for 1d6 damage and bite to freeze you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant emerald dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Green 'I')
=== Num:914  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:39  Ac:20  Exp:30
This glistening emerald dragonfly has wings which beat with powerful force.  
 This mix of dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 57.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe force; 1 time in 7.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry a gem
 stone.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Bright blue jell|y|y|ies|  (Light Blue 'j')
=== Num:922  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:184  Ac:1  Exp:30
It is smarter than your average jelly.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 57.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 is magical, casting spells which blink-self, drain mana or summon similar
 monsters; 1 time in 9.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch
to freeze you for 1d6 damage.  

The Eagle  (Umber 'B')
=== Num:1314  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:43  Ac:25  Exp:30
A magnificent huge predatory bird.   This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 11 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 57.27 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can fly
 over obstacles.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Green naga  (Green 'n')
=== Num:78  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:37  Ac:40  Exp:31
A large green serpent with a female's torso.  Her green skin glistens with acid.
This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 59.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 threatening at her native depth.  She may spit to dissolve you for 2d6 damage;
 1 time in 9.  She can bash down doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  
 She is immune to acid.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which she
 may notice from 180 feet.  She may carry a written item, potion or treasure.  
 She can crush to hurt you for 1d8 damage and spit to dissolve you for 2d6 
 damage.  

The Bright blue icky thing  (Light Blue 'i')
=== Num:183  Lev:11  Rar:5  Spd:-5  Hp:34  Ac:20  Exp:31
It is a strange, slimy, icky creature, with rudimentary intelligence, but evil
 cunning.  It hungers for food, and you look tasty.  This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves somewhat erratically and slowly.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 59.18 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is deadly at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors.  It breeds
 explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 150 feet.  It can crawl to poison you for 1d4 damage, 
 crawl to eat your food, hit to hurt you for 1d4 damage and hit to hurt you for
 1d4 damage.  

The Mummified human  (Light Slate 'z')
=== Num:271  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:80  Ac:34  Exp:31
It is a human form encased in mouldy wrappings.  This evil undead man is
 normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 59.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which create
 darkness, curse you, cause wounds or slow; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors and 
 bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry a weapon, armour, adornment or magical device.  It can hit to hurt 
 you for 2d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Wood elf hunter  (Light Yellow 'l')
=== Num:958  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:54  Ac:16  Exp:32
An elven figure, with sword and bow quick to hand.  This elf warrior mage is
 normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves quickly, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 61.09 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She may 
 create an arrow to hurt you for 3d6 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells which produce mana bolts, cure-self or blind; 1 time in 5.  She
 can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She lights up the
 surroundings.  She is immune to poison.  She takes a while to see intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile
 weapons, garments, lites, adornments, written items, musical items, potions or 
 edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage and hit to hurt you for
 1d7 damage.  

The Skeleton orc  (Mustard 's')
=== Num:117  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:42  Ac:36  Exp:33
It is an animated orc skeleton.  This evil undead orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 63.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness, darkness and edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d5 damage.  

The Giant grey termite  (Slate 'a')
=== Num:283  Lev:11  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:79  Ac:40  Exp:33
It looks like an ant, but with shorter legs and bigger fangs. It has a grey
 glistening exoskeleton.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 63.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Killer black beetle  (Light Dark 'K')
=== Num:956  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:74  Ac:46  Exp:33
It is looking for prey.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 63.00 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 4d5 damage.  

The Yellow naga  (Yellow 'n')
=== Num:986  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:54  Ac:40  Exp:33
A large yellow snake with a woman's torso.  This evil creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 11 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is 
 larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 63.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  
 She is magical, casting spells which slow; 1 time in 10.  She can bash down
 doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  She pays very little attention
 to intruders, which she may notice from 210 feet.  She may carry a written item
 , potion or treasure.  She can crush to hurt you for 1d10 damage and bite to 
 reduce dexterity and agility from you for 1d6 damage.  

The Orangutan  (Orange 'Y')
=== Num:1078  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:51  Ac:15  Exp:33
A humanoid covered with orange fur. Her arms are twice as long as her legs.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 63.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  
 She may create a shot to hurt you for 1d5 damage; 1 time in 7.  She can bash
 down doors, pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  
 She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 can hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Giant marksman ant  (Teal 'a')
=== Num:1170  Lev:11  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:51  Ac:40  Exp:33
A large, slimy ant spitting acid.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 11 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 63.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may spit to dissolve you for 2d9 damage; 1 time in 3.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 160 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can spit to dissolve you for 2d9 damage.  

The Rock worm mass|||es|  (Slate 'w')
=== Num:1191  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:-10  Hp:17  Ac:28  Exp:33
A disgusting mass of worms, indistinguishable from the stone around them until
 they move.  Acid drips from the worms and eats through the floor.  This insect
 is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves extremely erratically and
 slowly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 63.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors and bore through walls.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune
 to acid and poison.  It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be 
 frightened.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100
 feet.  It can crawl to dissolve you for 1d7 damage.  

The Swords|man|wyf||  (Light Umber 't')
=== Num:168  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:51  Ac:34  Exp:34
A warrior of considerable skill.  This woman warrior is normally found on
 dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 64.91 points for a
 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She can carry a
 lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  
 She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 may carry one or two weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items
 , potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to wound you for 3d5 damage
 and hit to wound you for 3d5 damage.  

The Killer white beetle  (White 'K')
=== Num:265  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:73  Ac:55  Exp:34
It is looking for prey.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 64.91 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 4d5 damage.  

The Machievallian moss|||es|  (Umber ';')
=== Num:671  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:34
A mass of brown vegetation. Its fronds move cloyingly towards you, then dart
 away.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves quickly, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 64.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 heal-self, give invisibility, teleport-self to or create traps; 1 time in 2.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept
 or cut.  It is observant of intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It
 can hit to reduce intelligence from you for 1d4 damage and hit to reduce 
 intelligence from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Grey wol|f|f|ves|  (Slate 'C')
=== Num:751  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:34
A huge and sineous wolf from the fecund swamps. Its breath is rank withpoison.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves a bit erratically
 and quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 64.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.
It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage and bite 
 to hurt and poison you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant brass dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Orange 'I')
=== Num:911  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:35  Ac:20  Exp:34
This gleaming brass dragonfly has wings which leave a static feeling in the air.
This mix of dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 64.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe disenchantment; 1 time in 7.  
 It can bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through
 webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It resists 
 disenchantment.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It may carry a precious metal.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.


The Killer blue beetle  (Blue 'K')
=== Num:955  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:74  Ac:48  Exp:34
It is looking for prey.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 64.91 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning.  
 It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  
 It can bite to hurt you for 4d5 damage.  

The Slimy mold  (Mustard 'm')
=== Num:978  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:65  Ac:15  Exp:34
It is a strange slimy growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 64.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.
It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It has no
 physical attacks.  

The Giant rotting toad  (Light Red 'F')
=== Num:1287  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:32  Exp:34
It is ugly and covered in rotting warts.  This evil undead animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 11 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 64.91 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to drain life from you for
 2d4 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which haste-self, 
 curse you, summon an undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors and swim under water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d4 damage and spit to drain life from 
 you for 2d4 damage.  

The Baby blue dragon  (Light Blue 'd')
=== Num:127  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:35
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a pale blue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 11
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 66.82 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.
It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Baby white dragon  (Light Slate 'd')
=== Num:128  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:35
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a pale white.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 11
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 66.82 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 frost powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you 
 for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant sapphire dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Blue 'I')
=== Num:915  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:39  Ac:20  Exp:35
This glistening sapphire dragonfly has wings that ride on gravity.  This mix of
dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves extremely
 erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 66.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may breathe gravity; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down
 doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be frightened.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry
 a gem stone.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Giant ruby dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Red 'I')
=== Num:916  Lev:11  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:39  Ac:20  Exp:35
This glistening ruby dragonfly doesn't seem to move at all.  This mix of dragon
 and insect is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves extremely
 erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 66.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may breathe inertia; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down
 doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be frightened.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry
 a gem stone.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Nruling  (Light Red 'u')
=== Num:1179  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:59  Ac:16  Exp:35
Little sparks of flame that dance around you, lashing whips and cursing
 horribly.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves
 somewhat erratically and quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 66.82 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may lash to burn you for 2d8 damage;
 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells which blink-self, 
 teleport-self to, cause wounds or slow; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors.  It
 is immune to fire and poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of
 rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It may carry a weapon, armour, written item or treasure.  It can lash to burn 
 you for 2d8 damage.  

The War bear  (Umber 'Q')
=== Num:1333  Lev:11  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:35  Exp:36
A bear, scarred and half-hairless from repeated pit-fighting and baiting,
 trained to kill.   This animal is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves
 at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 68.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which incur beserk rage; 1
 time in 6.  It can bash down doors and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100
 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d4 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite to wound you for 1d6 damage.  
 

[U] Brodda, the Easterling  (Light Pink 't')
=== Num:133  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:200  Ac:25  Exp:190
A nasty piece of work, Brodda picks on defenseless women and children.  This 
 man is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed.  Killing
 this creature is worth 362.73 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 dangerous at his native depth.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors and 
 bash down doors.  He needs lite to see you.  He takes a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry one or two good 
 weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions or edible
 items.  He can hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d12 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage.  

[U] Gorgol the Butcher  (Light Red 'o')
=== Num:140  Lev:11  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:221  Ac:20  Exp:200
He is a cunning and devious orc.  This evil orc is normally found on dungeon
 level 11 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 381.82
 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He
 can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  He is immune to poison.  He resists darkness.  He takes a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with
 escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 1d12 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage and 
 hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

[U] Old Man Willow  (Slate ':')
=== Num:622  Lev:11  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:314  Ac:10  Exp:250
A huge willow-tree, old and hoary.  It looks enormous, its sprawling branches
 going up like reaching arms with many long-fingered hands, its knotted and
 twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures that creak faintly as the bough moves. 
 Old Man Willow is the mightiest tree of his kind ever recorded, for he is
 black-hearted, limb-lithe, and filled with a great enchanting power of song.  
 This plant is normally found on dungeon level 11 and moves at normal speed, but
 does not deign to chase intruders.  Killing this creature is worth 477.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which teleport to, create darkness, drain mana, 
 terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 6.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness
 and blunt weapons.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry a good special object.  It can touch to send you 
 to sleep, touch to send you to sleep and crush to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  
 It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Poison ivy  (Violet ';')
=== Num:1351  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:-10  Hp:15  Ac:5  Exp:3
A mass of vegetation.  It seems to be growing...    This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 12 and moves slowly, but does not deign to chase
 intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 6.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It resists blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 50 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry
 a special object or treasure.  It can hit to hurt and poison you for 2d2 
 damage and hit to hurt and poison you for 2d2 damage.  

The Rotting mushroom patch|||es|  (Orange ',')
=== Num:657  Lev:12  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:20  Ac:1  Exp:6
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 12
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 12.00 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 2d3 damage and may 
 grow ammunition; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It may carry one or two mushrooms.  It can 
 release spores to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 2d3 damage.  

The Green slime  (Green ',')
=== Num:660  Lev:12  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:7  Ac:1  Exp:8
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 12 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 16.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  
 It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can touch to poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Yellow slime  (Yellow ',')
=== Num:661  Lev:12  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:10  Ac:1  Exp:10
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 12 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 20.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its
 native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  
 It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can touch to eat your food for 1d4 damage.  

The Bronze dragon bat  (Light Umber 'b')
=== Num:730  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:28  Exp:10
It is a sharp-tailed bat, wreathed in fire.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 20.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire or confusion; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors
 , can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It is immune to 
 lightning.  It cannot be confused.  It is observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to burn you 
 for 1d3 damage.  

The Silver slime  (Light Slate ',')
=== Num:662  Lev:12  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:12  Ac:1  Exp:11
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 12 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 22.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its
 native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  
 It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can touch to absorb light from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Giant silver ant  (Light Slate 'a')
=== Num:551  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:24  Ac:38  Exp:16
It is a small silvery ant, skittering about in unnatural darkness.  Its abdomen
 bears a two-inch sting.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 12 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 32.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 ; 1 time in 7 and is also magical, casting spells which create darkness; 1
 time in 14.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to absorb light from you for 1d3 
 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage.  

The Crypt creep  (Light Dark 's')
=== Num:1168  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:47  Ac:30  Exp:20
It is a frightening skeletal figures in black robes.   This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves a bit erratically at
 normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 40.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 cause wounds, animate monsters from dead bodies or summon an undead; 1 time in
 7.  It can open doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It
 is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists blindness and edged
 weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a while
 to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears with
 a friend.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d5 damage and bite to hurt and poison 
 you for 1d3 damage.  

The Gold dragon bat  (Yellow 'b')
=== Num:729  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:17  Ac:28  Exp:21
It is a sharp-tailed bat, fuming with poison.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 42.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe poison or sound; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be stunned.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to dissolve 
 you for 1d3 damage.  

The Cave crawler  (Blue Slate 'c')
=== Num:744  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:40  Exp:25
An ugly centipede damp with moisture and with wriggling tentacles around its
 head.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 50.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, climb on walls and
 ceilings and dig through earth and rubble.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can 
 sting to blind you for 2d9 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Black orc  (Light Dark 'o')
=== Num:178  Lev:12  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:62  Ac:36  Exp:28
She is a large orc with powerful arms and deep black skin.  This evil orc is
 normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 56.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 4d6 damage; 1 time in 8
 .  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and track you over
 land, but not through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She resists 
 darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, 
 armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to 
 hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage.  

The Shiver  (White 'G')
=== Num:835  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:12  Ac:17  Exp:34
It is a transparent, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 12 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 68.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which terrify; 1 time in 12.  It
 can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt
 weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can touch to 
 terrify you for 1d5 damage.  

The Hellcat  (Light Red 'f')
=== Num:1340  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:38  Ac:30  Exp:34
It is as large as a tiger, and its yellow eyes are pupilless.  This evil mix of
animal and demon is normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 68.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can track you over land, but not through
 water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is immune to acid and fire.  It
 resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d5 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 1d5 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Zombified human  (White 'z')
=== Num:165  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:24  Exp:35
It is a shambling human corpse dropping chunks of flesh behind it.  This evil
 undead man is normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger, faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 70.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  
 It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can 
 hit to hurt and poison you for 2d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  
 

The Giant shimmering ant  (Light Yellow 'a')
=== Num:689  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:42  Ac:40  Exp:35
It is large and has shocking mandibles.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 12 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 70.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning.  It resists lite and darkness.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It can bite to electrify you for 5d5 damage.  

The Killer grey beetle  (Slate 'K')
=== Num:948  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:55  Exp:35
It is looking for prey.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 12 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 70.00 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d6 
 damage.  

The Crimson mold  (Light Red 'm')
=== Num:981  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:70  Ac:18  Exp:35
It is a strange crimson growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 70.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.
It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch
to hurt you for 2d6 damage and touch to terrify you.  

The Panther  (Umber 'f')
=== Num:149  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:36
A large black cat, stalking you with intent.  It thinks you're its next meal.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves quickly, but is 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 72.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land,
 but not through water.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice
 from 400 feet.  It can claw to wound you for 1d8 damage and claw to wound you 
 for 1d8 damage.  

The Giant hunter ant  (Light Umber 'a')
=== Num:688  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:50  Ac:40  Exp:36
A large ant with powerful mandibles.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 12 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 72.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.
It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 160 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite 
 to hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Eye of the hurricane  (Light Slate 'e')
=== Num:795  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:111  Ac:6  Exp:36
A disembodied eye, surrounded by furiously blasting winds. You have difficulty
 walking upright.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 12 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon and does
 not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 72.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 gaze to hurt you for 2d6 damage, gaze to hurt you for 2d6 damage or gaze to 
 hurt you for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 produce lightning bolts or drain mana; 1 time in 3.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze 
 to hurt you for 2d6 damage, gaze to hurt you for 2d6 damage and gaze to hurt 
 you for 2d6 damage.  

The Baby black dragon  (Light Dark 'd')
=== Num:130  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:37
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a dull black.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 12
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 74.00 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.
It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant bronze ant  (Light Umber 'a')
=== Num:685  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:42  Ac:34  Exp:37
It is large and has a dangerous sting.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 74.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 fire.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 usually appears with a friend.  It may carry a precious metal.  It can bite to
hurt you for 1d8 damage and sting to confuse you for 1d8 damage.  

The Green orc  (Green 'o')
=== Num:1000  Lev:12  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:72  Ac:36  Exp:38
She is a large orc with powerful arms and oily green skin.  This evil orc
 archer is normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 76.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at
 her native depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 3d6 damage; 1 time
 in 5.  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and track you over
 land, but not through water.  She resists darkness.  She takes a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, 
 junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt
you for 3d4 damage.  

The Lemure  (Light Umber 'u')
=== Num:119  Lev:12  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:32  Exp:39
It is the larval form of a major demon.  This evil demon is normally found on
 dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 78.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may spit to burn you for
 2d4 damage; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors.  It is immune to fire and 
 poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  
 It cannot be frightened.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt 
 you for 1d6 damage and spit to burn you for 2d4 damage.  

The Orc sergeant  (Yellow 'o')
=== Num:995  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:75  Ac:46  Exp:39
A large orc who barks commands to her fellows.  This evil orc is normally found 
 on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 78.00 points for a
 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She can open
 doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  She
 resists darkness.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may
 notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment
 , tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d4 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage.  

The Hippocampus  (Teal 'H')
=== Num:1338  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:98  Ac:14  Exp:39
A strangely beautiful hybrid of a horse and a fish.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 78.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can track you over land,
 but not through water.  It must swim and cannot move out of water.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It may carry a treasure.  It can bite to hurt you for
 2d5 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d5 damage.  

The Forest troll  (Green 'T')
=== Num:214  Lev:12  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:99  Ac:50  Exp:40
She is green skinned and ugly.  This evil troll is normally found on dungeon
 level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 80.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track
 you over land, but not through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears with a friend.  She may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible
 item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite 
 to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Killer yellow beetle  (Yellow 'K')
=== Num:949  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:55  Exp:40
It is looking for prey.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 12 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 80.00 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d7 
 damage.  

The Disenchanter bat  (Light Purple 'b')
=== Num:553  Lev:12  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:26  Ac:28  Exp:41
A giant bat which feeds on raw magical energy.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 12 and moves somewhat erratically and very quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 82.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It must fly
 and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It resists disenchantment, 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to disenchant your armour and weapons and bite to drain 
 mana from you.  

The Black jell|y|y|ies|  (Light Dark 'j')
=== Num:924  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:225  Ac:1  Exp:41
It is a pulsing mound of black flesh.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 82.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 is magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 11.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 reduce all stats from you.  

The Black mold  (Light Dark 'm')
=== Num:982  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:65  Ac:18  Exp:41
It is a strange black growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 82.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.
It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch
to hurt you for 4d3 damage.  

The Zombified dwar|f|f|ves|  (Red 'z')
=== Num:1248  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:60  Ac:24  Exp:41
It is a shambling dwarven corpse, with a burnt beard and skin peeling and red,
 armed with rusted grenades.  This evil undead dwarf is normally found on
 dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 82.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may create a ball to explode you for 6d6 damage; 1 time in 6
 .  It can bash down doors.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire, cold and 
 poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Weir  (Light Yellow 'C')
=== Num:1362  Lev:12  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:62  Ac:30  Exp:41
It is a tracker; half human, half beast.   This evil mix of man and animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but
 is larger, faster or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 82.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can open doors, bash down doors and track you unerringly over land,
 but not through water.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you 
 for 1d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Baby green dragon  (Light Green 'd')
=== Num:129  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:42
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a sickly green.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 12
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 84.00 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 poison powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.
It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Half-orc  (Light Umber 'o')
=== Num:195  Lev:12  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:40  Exp:42
She is a hideous deformed cross-breed with man and orc, combining woman's
 strength and cunning with orcish evil.  The traitorous wizard Saruman is
 generally believed to be responsible for this abomination.  This evil mix of 
 woman and orc is normally found on dungeon level 12 and moves at normal speed,
 but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 84.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, 
 bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  She needs
 lite to see you.  She resists darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may
 carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item
 or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt you for
 3d4 damage.  

The Water naga  (Light Teal 'n')
=== Num:988  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:74  Ac:45  Exp:42
A large snake with a woman's torso and fins.  This evil creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 12 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is 
 larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 84.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She may spit to poison you for 1d10 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also magical,
 casting spells which produce water bolts or slow; 1 time in 4.  She can bash
 down doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  She is immune to poison.  
 She resists water.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which she may
 notice from 230 feet.  She may carry a written item, potion or treasure.  She
 can crush to batter you for 1d12 damage and spit to poison you for 1d10 damage
 .  

The Baby grey dragon  (Blue Slate 'd')
=== Num:1121  Lev:12  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:42
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a dull grey.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 12
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 84.00 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid or frost powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you
 over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to acid
 and cold.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 3 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Explodestool  (Light Purple ',')
=== Num:653  Lev:13  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:13  Ac:1  Exp:1
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 13
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 2.09 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may hurts
you for 5d5 damage; 1 time in 3.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can hurts
you for 5d5 damage.  

The Clear jell|y|y|ies|  (White 'j')
=== Num:919  Lev:13  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:108  Ac:1  Exp:8
It is a large pulsating mound of clear flesh.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 16.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 11.  
 It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is invisible.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists blindness.
It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Neekerbreeker  (Light Teal 'I')
=== Num:592  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:4  Ac:18  Exp:24
Believed to be an evil relative of the cricket, this creature gets its name
 from its incessant squeaking, which can best be described as "neek-breek,
 neek-breek".  The noise can drive people frantic, and worse still, can be heard
 for quite some distance, alerting other monsters to your presence.  This evil 
 insect is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves extremely erratically
 and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 50.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may shriek to do you no
 effect; 1 time in 6.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d3 damage
 and shriek to do you no effect.  

The Giant yellow jellyfish  (Yellow 'j')
=== Num:1257  Lev:13  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:45  Ac:1  Exp:26
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing yellow lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 54.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 16.  
 It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must swim and cannot
 move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can touch to poison you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant fire bat  (Light Red 'b')
=== Num:712  Lev:13  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:21  Ac:30  Exp:27
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 13
 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 56.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is immune to fire.  It takes quite a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to burn you for 3d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage and claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Lizard |man|woman|folk|  (Light Green 'R')
=== Num:1353  Lev:13  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:40  Exp:28
Intelligent lizard beings from the depths.   This evil mix of woman and animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 , more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 58.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She may create a dagger to slow you for 4d4 damage; 1 time in 6
 .  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, swim under
 water and track you over land, but not through water.  She needs lite to see
 you.  She is immune to acid.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a 
 garment, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 4d4 damage.  

The Cold hound  (White 'Z')
=== Num:222  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:33  Ac:30  Exp:34
A hound as tall as a man, this creature appears to be composed of angular
 planes of ice.  Cold radiates from it and freezes your breath in the air.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 71.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may breathe frost; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to freeze you for 2d6 
 damage and claw to freeze you for 3d3 damage.  

The Energy hound  (Blue 'Z')
=== Num:223  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:33  Ac:30  Exp:34
Saint Elmo's Fire forms a ghostly halo around this hound, and sparks sting your
 fingers as energy builds up in the air around you.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 71.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe lightning; 1
 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but
 not through water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is immune to lightning.
It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to electrify you for 2d6 damage and 
 claw to electrify you for 3d3 damage.  

The Fire hound  (Red 'Z')
=== Num:221  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:33  Ac:30  Exp:35
Flames lick at its feet and its tongue is a blade of fire.  You can feel a
 furnace heat radiating from the creature.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 73.18 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time in 10.  It
 can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.
It lights up the surroundings.  It is immune to fire.  It resists lava.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to burn you for 2d6 damage and claw to burn 
 you for 3d3 damage.  

The Giant garnet frog  (Magenta-Pink 'F')
=== Num:811  Lev:13  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:16  Exp:35
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 13 and
 moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 73.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It breeds explosively.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It can bite to reduce strength and size from you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The Giant brass frog  (Orange 'F')
=== Num:819  Lev:13  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:22  Ac:16  Exp:37
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 13 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 77.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  
 It breeds explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Baby purple dragon  (Light Purple 'd')
=== Num:1134  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:104  Ac:30  Exp:40
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a dull purple.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 13
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 83.64 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning or fire powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning and fire.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you 
 for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Baby red dragon  (Light Red 'd')
=== Num:131  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:113  Ac:30  Exp:41
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a pale red.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 13 and
 moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 85.73 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 fire powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.
It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Wood elf warrior  (Umber 'l')
=== Num:138  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:59  Ac:16  Exp:41
A elven figure in armour and ready with his sword.  This elf warrior is
 normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 85.73
 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  
 She may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 2d7 damage; 1 time in 5.  She
 can open doors and bash down doors.  She lights up the surroundings.  She
 resists lite.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from
 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, written items, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  
 She can hit to wound you for 2d9 damage and hit to wound you for 2d9 damage.  

The Air spirit  (Teal 'E')
=== Num:163  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+20  Hp:34  Ac:40  Exp:42
A whirlwind of sentient air.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level
 13 and moves extremely erratically and very quickly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 87.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and easily evade blows and
 missiles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, poison and blunt weapons.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept, slowed or 
 paralyzed.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It may carry a junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage.  

The Dungeon crawler  (Light Slate 'c')
=== Num:745  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:40  Exp:42
A deformed centipede wet with secretions and with barbed tentacles around its
 head.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 87.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, climb on walls and
 ceilings and dig through earth and rubble.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can 
 sting to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d9 damage.  

The Gorilla  (Slate 'Y')
=== Num:1077  Lev:13  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:68  Ac:15  Exp:42
A huge, lumbering humanoid covered with thick black fur.   This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 87.82 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may 
 create a shot to hurt you for 1d5 damage; 1 time in 7.  She can bash down doors
 , pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  She is
 fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears with a friend.  She can hit to hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Giant wolf tick  (Mud 'S')
=== Num:1098  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:50  Exp:42
It is moving slowly and intently towards you.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 87.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain
 strength.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can bite to infect you with
 disease for 3d4 damage and sting to hurt you for 3d4 damage.  

The Hippogriff  (Light Umber 'H')
=== Num:152  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:98  Ac:14  Exp:43
A majestic hybrid of eagle and horse.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 89.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength, fly over obstacles and track you over land,
 but not through water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It can claw to wound you for 2d5 damage and peck to 
 hurt you for 2d5 damage.  

The Dark elven cultist  (Teal 'l')
=== Num:162  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:78  Ac:30  Exp:43
A elven figure, dressed all in black, chanting curses and waiting to deliver
 your soul to hell.  This evil elf is normally found on dungeon level 13 and
 moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 89.91 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which invoke darkness storms, recover mana, heal-self, cure-self, create
 darkness, curse you, cause wounds, blind or confuse; 1 time in 4.  She can 
 open doors and bash down doors.  She lights up the surroundings.  She is hurt
 by bright light.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may
 notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, 
 garments, lites, adornments, written items, musical items, potions or edible
 items.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d4 
 damage.  

The Mummified orc  (Light Yellow 'z')
=== Num:256  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:64  Ac:28  Exp:43
It is an orcish figure covered in wrappings.  This evil undead orc is normally
 found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 89.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  
 It resists darkness.  It cannot be frightened, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a weapon, 
 armour, adornment, magical device or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Giant fire tick  (Light Red 'S')
=== Num:286  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:65  Ac:54  Exp:43
It is smoking and burning with great heat.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 89.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to fire.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 140 feet.  It can bite to burn you for 3d6 damage.  

The Mage  (Light Red 'q')
=== Num:305  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:62  Ac:40  Exp:43
A mage of some power - you can tell by the size of her hat.  This evil woman
 mage is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 89.91 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 lightning bolts, produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, produce mana bolts, 
 haste-self, recover mana, blink-self, create a shield, blind or confuse; 1
 time in 2.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  
 She needs lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, magical devices, written items, potions or edible items.  She can 
 hit to hurt you for 2d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d5 damage.  

The Gnome wizard  (Violet 'h')
=== Num:880  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:104  Ac:40  Exp:43
A wizard of short stature.  This evil dwarf mage is normally found on dungeon
 level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 89.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce frost balls, produce fire bolts, heal-self, 
 create traps, summon a monster, terrify or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can open
 doors.  It cannot be slowed or paralyzed.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two weapons
 , missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items, potions, 
 edible items or treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage.  

The Baby cyan dragon  (Light Teal 'd')
=== Num:1130  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:43
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales either green or blue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 13 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 89.91
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 may breathe lightning or poison powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down
 doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 lightning and poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for
 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 
 damage.  

The Black ogre  (Light Dark 'O')
=== Num:190  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:33  Exp:44
A massive orc-like figure with black skin and powerful arms.  This evil mix of 
 orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 92.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.
It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, armour, garment, 
 tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 2d8 
 damage and hit to batter you for 2d8 damage.  

The Giant lightning bat  (Light Blue 'b')
=== Num:711  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:34  Ac:34  Exp:44
It screeches as it attacks.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 13
 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 92.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is immune to lightning.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to electrify you for 3d8 damage, claw to hurt you for
 1d5 damage and claw to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Zombified ape  (Mustard 'Y')
=== Num:1294  Lev:13  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:68  Ac:15  Exp:44
It is an animated simian corpse.  Flesh falls off in large chunks as it
 shambles forward.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 92.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may create a shot to hurt you for 1d5 damage; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down
 doors, pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and 
 poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It can hit to hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Skeleton human  (White 's')
=== Num:164  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:45
It is an animated human skeleton.  This evil undead man is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 94.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage and 
 hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Drider  (Blue 'S')
=== Num:171  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:66  Ac:30  Exp:45
A dark elven torso merged with the bloated form of a giant spider.  This evil
 mix of elf and insect is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 94.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which create darkness, cause wounds or 
 confuse; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.
It appears in a giant web.  It is immune to poison.  It pays little attention
 to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for
 1d12 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage and bite to hurt and poison you 
 for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant brass ant  (Orange 'a')
=== Num:686  Lev:13  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:42  Ac:34  Exp:45
It is large and has a dangerous sting.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 94.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 lightning.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.
It usually appears with a friend.  It may carry a precious metal.  It can bite 
 to hurt you for 1d8 damage and sting to disenchant your armour and weapons for
 1d8 damage.  

The Stegocentipede  (Light Violet 'c')
=== Num:169  Lev:13  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:55  Ac:30  Exp:46
It is a vast armoured centipede with massive mandibles and a spiked tail.  This
insect is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves a bit erratically and
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 96.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d5 damage and sting to 
 hurt you for 2d5 damage.  

The Giant yellow scorpion  (Yellow 'S')
=== Num:259  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:50  Ac:38  Exp:46
It is a giant scorpion with a sharp stinger.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 96.18
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.
It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for
 1d8 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 2d5 damage.  

The Muck crawler  (Mud 'c')
=== Num:746  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:76  Ac:40  Exp:46
A monstrous centipede slick with filth and with ropy tentacles around its head.
This insect is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves a bit erratically
 at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 96.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors, climb on walls and ceilings and dig
 through earth and rubble.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune
 to poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 150
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can sting to infect you with disease 
 for 2d11 damage.  

The Blue naga  (Blue 'n')
=== Num:987  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:62  Ac:40  Exp:46
A large blue snake with a woman's torso.  This evil creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 13 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 96.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may 
 spit to poison you for 1d8 damage; 1 time in 9 and is also magical, casting
 spells which blink-self; 1 time in 9.  She can bash down doors, pick up objects
 and swim under water.  She is immune to cold and poison.  She pays very little
 attention to intruders, which she may notice from 220 feet.  She may carry a 
 written item, potion or treasure.  She can crush to freeze you for 1d12 damage
 and spit to poison you for 1d8 damage.  

The Creeping gold coins||||  (Yellow '$')
=== Num:146  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:-10  Hp:76  Ac:36  Exp:47
It appears to be a pile of gold coins, until it starts crawling towards you on
 tiny legs.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves
 slowly.  A kill of this creature is worth 98.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may carry up to 3
precious metals.  It can hit to batter you for 3d6 damage and touch to remove 
 enchantments from you.  

The Shambling mound  (Green ';')
=== Num:229  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:68  Ac:16  Exp:47
A pile of rotting vegetation that slides towards you with a disgusting stench,
 waking all it nears.  This evil plant is normally found on dungeon level 13
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 98.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may shriek to
do you no effect; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry a treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage, hit to hurt you for
 1d8 damage and shriek to do you no effect.  

The Shimmering mold  (Light Yellow 'm')
=== Num:554  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:138  Ac:24  Exp:47
It is a strange growth on the dungeon floor, glowing and crackling with sparks.
This plant is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 98.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 lightening beams; 1 time in 5.  It can communicate telepathically with its own
 kind.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to lightning and poison.  It resists lite and darkness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to electrify you for 5d4 damage and 
 touch to electrify you for 5d4 damage.  

The Giant brown jellyfish  (Umber 'j')
=== Num:1266  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:139  Ac:1  Exp:47
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing brown lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 98.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 reduce charisma from you for 1d4 damage and touch to reduce charisma from you 
 for 1d4 damage.  

The Venus flytrap  (White ';')
=== Num:1357  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:55  Ac:5  Exp:47
A carnivorous plant that is difficult to detect, until it suddenly snaps shut
 around its prey and releases paralysing enzymes to stop its struggles.   This 
 plant is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves quickly, but does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 98.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is invisible.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be cut.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to paralyze you for
 3d3 damage, hit to paralyze you for 3d3 damage and hit to paralyze you for 3d3 
 damage.  

The Sea serpent  (Teal 'J')
=== Num:941  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:45  Exp:48
It is about thirty six feet long.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 13 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 100.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 50
 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d4 damage and crush to hurt you
for 4d6 damage.  

The Rat-thing  (Light Red 'r')
=== Num:1324  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:44  Ac:20  Exp:48
A ratlike creature with a humanlike face.  This evil animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 13 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 100.36
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 is magical, casting spells which terrify or confuse; 1 time in 8.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to 
 hurt you for 3d2 damage, bite to hurt you for 3d1 damage and bite to hurt you 
 for 3d2 damage.  

The Disenchanter mold  (Light Purple 'm')
=== Num:143  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:70  Ac:20  Exp:49
It is a strange glowing growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 102.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  ; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells which drain
 mana; 1 time in 5.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 disenchantment, magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 1d6 damage.  

The Blink spider  (Light Blue 'S')
=== Num:236  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:25  Exp:49
A spider that never seems quite there.  Everywhere you look it is just
 half-seen in the corner of one eye.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 13 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 102.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which blink-self
 , teleport-self to or teleport to; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and 
 climb on walls and ceilings.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It appears
 in a giant web.  It is immune to poison.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to hurt you for 1d8 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 
 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 damage.  

The Killer stag beetle  (Teal 'K')
=== Num:257  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:60  Ac:55  Exp:49
It is a giant beetle with vicious claws.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 102.45 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can claw to wound you for
 3d6 damage and claw to wound you for 3d6 damage.  

The Killer pink beetle  (Magenta-Pink 'K')
=== Num:282  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:50  Exp:49
It is a giant beetle with poisonous mandibles.  This insect is normally found 
 on dungeon level 13 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 102.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors and fly over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can 
 bite to reduce strength and size from you for 4d4 damage.  

The Evil eye  (Green 'e')
=== Num:796  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:125  Ac:6  Exp:49
A disembodied eye, gazing at you with malice.  This evil creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 102.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may gaze to reduce wisdom from you for 8d6 damage; 1
 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells which heal-self, create darkness
 , cause wounds, blind or confuse; 1 time in 3.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze 
 to reduce wisdom from you for 8d6 damage.  

The Orc mage  (Red 'o')
=== Num:999  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:112  Ac:36  Exp:49
An orc who is so bright she knows how to cast spells.  This evil orc mage is
 normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 102.45
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She is magical, casting spells which produce mana bolts, blink-self, blind or 
 confuse; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors, bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She resists 
 darkness.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She takes quite a while
 to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage.  

The Shaman  (Light Violet 'p')
=== Num:177  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:77  Ac:10  Exp:50
A shaman devoted to Nature.  This evil woman shaman is normally found on
 dungeon level 13 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 104.55 points for a
 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce wind balls, produce lightning bolts
 , produce fire bolts, haste-self, recover mana, cure-self, blink-self, incur
 heroism, summon insects, summon animals, blind, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 2.
She can carry a lite to see you and open doors.  She needs lite to see you.  
 She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 may carry one or two weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written
 items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d4 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Baby yellow dragon  (Light Yellow 'd')
=== Num:1126  Lev:13  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:104  Ac:30  Exp:50
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a dull yellow.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 13
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 104.55 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 fire or poison powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you
 over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire and poison.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3
treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

[U] the Great Goblin of the Misty Mountains  (Violet 'k')
=== Num:173  Lev:13  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:172  Ac:24  Exp:300
A great goblin, powerful in magic and sorcery.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc
 is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature
 is worth 627.27 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his
 native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which recover mana, 
 heal-self, blink-self, teleport-self, summon similar monsters, summon a monster
 , blind or slow; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors, bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  He is hurt by bright light.  He is
 immune to poison.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 180 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 3 good 
 weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items
 .  He can hit to hurt you for 1d9 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d9 damage and 
 hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

[U] Ufthak of Cirith Ungol  (Mustard 'o')
=== Num:181  Lev:13  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:288  Ac:50  Exp:390
A strong orc guarding the pass of Cirith Ungol.  He is mortally afraid of
 spiders.  This evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 13 and moves at
 normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 815.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He can open doors, bash down
 doors and track you over land, but not through water.  He is immune to cold
 and poison.  He resists darkness.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he
 may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry one
 or two good weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items
 or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d4 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage.  

The Gibbering mouther  (Orange 'j')
=== Num:1347  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:27  Ac:20  Exp:16
A chaotic mass of pulsating flesh, mouths and eyes.   This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 34.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 sound; 1 time in 12 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify or 
 confuse; 1 time in 12.  It can swim under water and communicate telepathically
 with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  
 It is immune to poison.  It cannot be stunned or frightened.  It takes a while
 to see intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It can crawl to hurt and
 poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Red mold  (Red 'm')
=== Num:233  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:74  Ac:16  Exp:48
It is a strange red growth on the dungeon floor; it seems to burn with flame.  
 This plant is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 104.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  ; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to fire and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It
 can touch to burn you for 4d4 damage.  

The Rabid wol|f|f|ves|  (Green 'C')
=== Num:1096  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:32  Ac:30  Exp:48
A large wolf, foam spraying from its mouth, and its coming right at you.  This 
 animal is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves quickly, but is larger
 or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 104.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly
 over land, but not through water.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It
 cannot be frightened.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 300 feet.  It can bite to infect you with disease for 2d4 damage and bite
to infect you with disease for 2d4 damage.  

The Hungry soul  (Light Red 'G')
=== Num:849  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:16  Ac:10  Exp:49
It is thin and insubstantial.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 14 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 106.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self, drain mana or cause hunger; 1 time in 12.  It can pass through
 walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or 
 treasures.  It can hit to starve you for 2d2 damage and touch to eat your food
 .  

The Giant red jellyfish  (Red 'j')
=== Num:1267  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:162  Ac:1  Exp:49
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing red lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 106.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 burn you for 1d8 damage.  

The Giant spider  (Purple 'S')
=== Num:135  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:54  Ac:16  Exp:50
It is a vast black spider whose bulbous body is bloated with poison.  This 
 insect is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 109.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and climb on walls
 and ceilings.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It appears in a giant web.
It is immune to poison.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may
 notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d10 damage, bite to hurt
 and poison you for 1d6 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Forgotten soul  (Mud 'G')
=== Num:848  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:10  Ac:10  Exp:50
It is almost insubstantial.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 14 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 109.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self, drain mana or blind; 1 time in 16.  It can pass through walls, 
 pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut
 .  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage and touch to reduce intelligence from 
 you.  

The Giant yellow locust  (Yellow 'I')
=== Num:904  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:24  Ac:7  Exp:50
It voraciously eats and breeds leaving nothing in its wake.  This insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.
A kill of this creature is worth 109.09 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is immune to fire and 
 poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 60
 feet.  It can bite to poison you for 1d3 damage and bite to eat your food.  

The Giant pink jellyfish  (Light Red 'j')
=== Num:1260  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:117  Ac:1  Exp:50
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing pink lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 109.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 reduce strength and size from you for 1d5 damage.  

The Giant tarantula  (Orange 'S')
=== Num:196  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:75  Ac:32  Exp:51
A giant spider with hairy black and red legs.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 14 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 111.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It appears in a giant web.  It is immune to poison.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite 
 to enrage you for 1d13 power.  

The Giant slug  (Light Umber 'w')
=== Num:1325  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:-10  Hp:57  Ac:25  Exp:51
It is slowly making its way towards you, eating everything in its path...   
 This mix of animal and insect is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves
 slowly.  A kill of this creature is worth 111.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may spit to dissolve 
 you for 2d6 damage or spray to dissolve you for 2d6 damage and may breathe 
 acid; 1 time in 10.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 100 feet.  It can bite to dissolve you for 4d4 damage, spit to dissolve 
 you for 2d6 damage and spray to dissolve you for 2d6 damage.  

The Swamp thing  (Light Teal 'H')
=== Num:1355  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:46  Ac:60  Exp:51
A creature that was once human, but is now as green as moss.   This mix of man
 and plant is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 111.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash down doors, swim
 under water and track you over land, but not through water.  It resists 
 blindness and blunt weapons.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It can claw to terrify you for 2d5 damage and 
 claw to terrify you for 5d2 damage.  

The Magic mushroom patch|||es|  (Light Blue ',')
=== Num:191  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+30  Hp:3  Ac:10  Exp:52
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  It seems to glow with an unusual light.  This 
 plant is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves incredibly quickly, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 113.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may release spores to confuse you, 
 release spores to confuse you, release spores to space out you or release
 spores to space out you and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 1 and is also
 magical, casting spells which blink-self, create darkness, terrify or slow; 1
 time in 1.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists magical spells and 
 the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 400 feet.  It may carry one or two mushrooms.  It can release spores to 
 confuse you, release spores to confuse you, release spores to space out you
 and release spores to space out you.  

The Mandrake  (Umber ':')
=== Num:675  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:192  Ac:20  Exp:52
It is a tree twisted into the shape of a man.  This evil plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 113.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  It may wail to remove enchantments from you or shriek to reduce
intelligence from you; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 create darkness or drain mana; 1 time in 4.  It is not detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 60 feet.  It may carry a special object or treasure.  
 It can wail to remove enchantments from you and shriek to reduce intelligence
 from you.  

The Wooden mold  (Light Umber 'm')
=== Num:980  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:101  Ac:50  Exp:52
It is a strange wooden growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 113.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its
 native depth.  ; 1 time in 4.  It can communicate telepathically with its own
 kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept
 or cut.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It
 can touch to poison you for 2d6 damage.  

The Wood elf priest||ess|s|  (White 'l')
=== Num:1174  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:78  Ac:30  Exp:52
A elven figure, dressed all in white.  This elf priest is normally found on
 dungeon level 14 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 113.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce balls of light, produce holy orbs, recover
 mana, heal-self, cure-self, incur heroism, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  She
 can open doors and bash down doors.  She lights up the surroundings.  She
 resists lite.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, 
 lites, adornments, written items, musical items, potions or edible items.  She
 can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Goblin sapper  (Light Purple 'k')
=== Num:1346  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+1  Hp:34  Ac:32  Exp:52
She is equipped with a pick axe and an explosive charge, neither of which she
 looks entirely capable of using.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally
 found on dungeon level 14 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 113.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native
 depth.  She may hurts you for 20d2 damage.  She can carry a lite to see you, 
 open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  
 She needs lite to see you.  She is immune to poison.  She takes quite a while
 to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She can hit to hurt you
for 1d8 damage and hurts you for 20d2 damage.  

The Grape jell|y|y|ies|  (Light Purple 'j')
=== Num:157  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:234  Ac:1  Exp:53
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  It is a pulsing mound of glowing flesh.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 115.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain
 mana; 1 time in 11.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which it may notice from
 20 feet.  It can touch to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you.  

The Baby silver dragon  (Light Yellow 'd')
=== Num:756  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:53
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a pale silver.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 14
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 115.64 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 frost or fear powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you
 over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  
 It cannot be frightened.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you
for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 
 damage.  

The Grey ogre  (Slate 'O')
=== Num:1010  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:103  Ac:33  Exp:53
A massive orc-like figure with pale grey face and powerful arms.  This evil mix
 of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 115.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.
It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, armour, garment, 
 tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 2d9 
 damage and hit to batter you for 2d9 damage.  

The Creeping garnet gems  (Light Red '$')
=== Num:1236  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:50  Ac:50  Exp:53
It appears to be a pile of garnets, slithering toward you on lots of tiny legs.
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 115.64 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning
 and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may
 carry up to 3 gem stones.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d4 damage
 and touch to poison you for 2d5 damage.  

The Goblin grenadier  (Red 'k')
=== Num:1250  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:36  Ac:13  Exp:53
A slightly-singed ugly humanoid liable to blow himself up as much as anyone
 else.  This evil mix of dwarf and orc is normally found on dungeon level 14
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 115.64 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It may create a ball to explode you 
 for 6d5 damage or explodes you; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, bash down
 doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.
It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 240 feet.  It may
 carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item
 or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage and explodes you.  

The Giant silver jellyfish  (Light Slate 'j')
=== Num:1256  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:45  Ac:1  Exp:53
It is a giant silver jellyfish that sucks all light from its surroundings.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves quickly.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 115.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  ; 1 time in 16 and is also magical, casting
 spells which drain mana; 1 time in 16.  It can communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It must swim and cannot move out of water.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can touch to absorb light from you for 1d3 damage and touch to absorb light
 from you for 1d3 damage.  

The Mummified servant  (Teal 'z')
=== Num:1097  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:64  Ac:28  Exp:54
This lesser mummy was created to do menial tasks after death.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but
 is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 117.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a weapon, armour, 
 adornment, magical device or treasure.  It can hit to infect you with disease 
 for 2d6 damage and touch to poison you for 2d6 damage.  

The Rock mole  (Light Purple 'r')
=== Num:1331  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:30  Exp:55
This large, mole-like creature has fangs powerful enough to bore through solid
 rock.   This animal is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 120.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors and bore through walls.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for
 1d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Giant army ant  (Deep Light Blue 'a')
=== Num:323  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:61  Ac:40  Exp:56
An armoured form moving with purpose.  Powerful on its own, flee when hordes of
 them march.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 122.18 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Grizzly bear  (Light Umber 'Q')
=== Num:564  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:73  Ac:35  Exp:56
A huge, beastly bear, more savage than most of its kind.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 122.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can claw to 
 hurt you for 1d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d8 damage, bite to hurt you for
 1d12 damage and crush to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Baby gold dragon  (Mustard 'd')
=== Num:575  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:57
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a pale gold.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 14
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 124.36 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 poison or sound powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It cannot be stunned.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 
 precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for
 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Baby copper dragon  (Mud 'd')
=== Num:755  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:57
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a pale copper.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 14
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 124.36 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning or nexus powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 
 precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for
 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Sea naga  (Teal 'n')
=== Num:989  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:50  Exp:57
A large snake with a woman's torso and fins.  This evil creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 14 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is 
 larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 124.36 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native
 depth.  She can bash down doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  She is
 immune to cold and poison.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which
 she may notice from 230 feet.  She may carry a written item, potion or 
 treasure.  She can crush to hurt you for 1d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage and sting to poison you for 1d10 damage.  

The Night orc  (Deep Light Blue 'o')
=== Num:1001  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:72  Ac:36  Exp:58
She is a large orc with powerful arms and night blue skin.  This evil orc
 archer is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 126.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous
 at her native depth.  She may create a dart to blind you for 3d5 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters; 1 time in 9 and is also magical, casting spells
 which create darkness; 1 time in 9.  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick
 up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  She is hurt by 
 bright light.  She resists darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may
 carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item
 or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to blind you for
 3d6 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Water spirit  (Violet 'E')
=== Num:217  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:38  Ac:28  Exp:59
A whirlpool of sentient liquid.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 14 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 128.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors and swim under water.  It is cold blooded.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by water remover.  It is immune to 
 acid and poison.  It resists water, blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed, slept, slowed or paralyzed.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to hurt
you for 4d2 damage and hit to hurt you for 4d2 damage.  

The Mirkwood orc  (Light Teal 'o')
=== Num:1002  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:40  Exp:59
She is a large orc with powerful arms and brown barklike skin.  This evil orc
 archer is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 128.73 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous
 at her native depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 3d6 damage; 1
 time in 4.  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects, climb on
 walls and ceilings and track you over land, but not through water.  She
 resists darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  
 She can hit to wound you for 3d6 damage and hit to hurt and poison you for 3d4 
 damage.  

The Demolitions expert  (Light Purple 't')
=== Num:1251  Lev:14  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:61  Ac:40  Exp:59
An expert with traps and explosives, she is missing only a couple of fingers.  
 This woman is normally found on dungeon level 14 and moves at normal speed, but
 is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 128.73 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create a ball to explode you; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which create traps; 1 time in 5.  She
 can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  
 She needs lite to see you.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which
 she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, garments, 
 tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

[U] Boldog, the Orc Captain  (Yellow 'o')
=== Num:159  Lev:14  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:212  Ac:60  Exp:390
A leader of a band of raiding orcs.  Morgoth has charged him with the task of
 abducting Luthien from Doriath.  This evil orc is normally found on dungeon
 level 14 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 850.91
 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He
 may create an arrow to hurt you for 3d10 damage; 1 time in 5.  He can open
 doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  He is
 immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He resists darkness.  He takes a
 while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears
 with escorts.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d10 damage.  

The Clear hound  (White 'Z')
=== Num:203  Lev:15  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:20  Ac:30  Exp:6
A completely translucent hound.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 15 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 13.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is invisible.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d9 damage and claw to hurt you for
 2d3 damage.  

The Air hound  (Green 'Z')
=== Num:239  Lev:15  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:63  Ac:30  Exp:42
Swirling vapours surround this beast as it floats towards you, seemingly
 walking on air.  Noxious gases sting your throat.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 15 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 95.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe poison; 1
 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It
 resists blunt weapons.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice
 from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for
 1d12 damage and claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage.  

The Giant yellow |mouse|mouse|mice|  (Yellow 'r')
=== Num:1039  Lev:15  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:7  Ac:12  Exp:43
It is about four feet long with large teeth.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 15 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 97.73
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 breeds explosively.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage, bite to hurt and
 poison you for 1d6 damage and bite to eat your food.  

The Green ogre  (Green 'O')
=== Num:1007  Lev:15  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:33  Exp:44
A massive orc-like figure with green skin and powerful arms.  This evil mix of 
 orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 100.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may create an arrow to hurt and poison you for 4d6 damage; 1 time in 4 and is
 also magical, casting spells which produce poison balls; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It
 can hit to batter you for 2d8 damage and hit to batter you for 2d8 damage.  

The Water vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Light Teal 'v')
=== Num:253  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:56
A spinning whirlpool of water.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 15 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 127.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  ; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce water balls; 1
 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, swim under water and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 hurt by water remover.  It is immune to acid and blunt weapons.  It resists 
 water and blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can 
 envelope to blast you with water for 3d3 damage.  

The Baby bronze dragon  (Light Umber 'd')
=== Num:574  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:56
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a dull bronze.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 15
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 127.27 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 fire or confusion powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be 
 confused.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 3 precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Mirkwood wol|f|f|ves|  (Light Teal 'C')
=== Num:754  Lev:15  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:128  Ac:30  Exp:56
It is a huge wolf hailing from Mirkwood with eyes that glow with evil
 intelligence.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves a
 bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 127.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, climb on walls and ceilings and track you unerringly over
 land, but not through water.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you 
 for 1d6 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage.  

The Flayed skull  (Light Red 's')
=== Num:1352  Lev:15  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:51  Ac:30  Exp:56
A pack of skulls with the flesh torn from their bones, animated by necromantic
 spirits.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 15 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 127.27 points for a 1st level character.
It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which recover mana, blink-self or cause wounds; 1 time in 3.  It
 can bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to cold and poison.  It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry
 a weapon, armour, adornment or treasure.  It can bite to wound you for 2d3 
 damage and trample to reduce intelligence from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Forest wight  (Green 'W')
=== Num:267  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:51  Ac:30  Exp:57
It is a ghostly apparition with a humanoid form.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed
 , but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 129.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain
 mana or terrify; 1 time in 10.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  
 It resists darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite
 a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one
 or two weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices, potions or 
 treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d9 damage and touch to drain 
 experience (by 20d6+) from you.  

The Giant gold frog  (Yellow 'F')
=== Num:821  Lev:15  Rar:6  Spd:+0  Hp:30  Ac:24  Exp:57
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 15 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 129.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  
 It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water
 .  It breeds explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison 
 you for 5d4 damage.  

The Orc priest||ess|s|  (Blue 'o')
=== Num:998  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:112  Ac:36  Exp:58
An orc who is so bright she knows how to cast spells.  This evil orc priest is
 normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves at normal speed, but is older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 131.82
 points for a 1st level character.  She is threatening at her native depth.  
 She is magical, casting spells which cure-self, blink-self, cause wounds, 
 incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors, bash down doors
 and track you over land, but not through water.  She resists darkness.  She
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage.  

The Knobble-stick  (Magenta-Pink '~')
=== Num:1190  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:25  Ac:15  Exp:58
A animated human femur painted bright florescent pink.  It dances about you and
 hits you every time you make a mistake.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 15 and moves quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 131.82 points for a 1st level character.
It is threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which blink-self or teleport-self to; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind and easily evade blows and
 missiles.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold
 and poison.  It resists water, nether, blindness, teleportation and edged
 weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry
 a special object or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 1d7 damage.  

The Clay golem  (Mud 'g')
=== Num:204  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:-10  Hp:60  Ac:30  Exp:59
It is a massive animated statue made out of hardened clay.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves slowly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 134.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which haste-self; 1 time in 7.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or 
 cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Inquisitor  (Red 'p')
=== Num:1254  Lev:15  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:83  Ac:40  Exp:59
A priest in a blood-red robe with blade heated red-hot.  This evil woman priest
 is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves at normal speed, but is older
 or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 134.09 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce acid bolts, 
 produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, recover mana, heal-self, cure-self, 
 curse you, cause wounds, incur heroism, give resistance to the elements, probe
 your weaknesses or blind; 1 time in 2.  She can carry a lite to see you, open
 doors and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually
 appears with a friend.  She may carry one or two weapons, armours, garments, 
 lites, adornments, written items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to 
 wound you for 5d5 damage.  

The Dweller on the threshold  (Light Violet 'u')
=== Num:1350  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:127  Ac:30  Exp:59
An arcane guardian with an appetite for mages.   This evil demon is normally
 found on dungeon level 15 and moves at normal speed, but does not deign to
 chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth 134.09 points for a
 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may gaze to 
 petrify you for 4d4 damage, gaze to terrify you for 3d3 damage or gaze to 
 confuse you for 3d3 damage and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 acid bolts, drain mana, summon a monster or terrify; 1 time in 4.  It is
 immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of
 rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may
 carry a weapon, armour, written item or treasure.  It can gaze to petrify you 
 for 4d4 damage, gaze to terrify you for 3d3 damage and gaze to confuse you for
 3d3 damage.  

The Mirkwood spider  (Light Teal 'S')
=== Num:198  Lev:15  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:38  Ac:25  Exp:60
A strong and powerful spider from Mirkwood forest.  Cunning and evil, it seeks
 to taste your juicy insides.  This evil insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 15 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 136.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and climb on walls and
 ceilings.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It appears in a giant web.  It
 is immune to poison.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may
 notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you 
 for 1d8 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 damage and bite to hurt
 and poison you for 1d6 damage.  

The Stone troll  (Slate 'T')
=== Num:278  Lev:15  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:116  Ac:40  Exp:60
She is a giant troll with scabrous black skin.  This evil troll is normally
 found on dungeon level 15 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 136.36 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time
 in 6.  She can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you over land, but not through water.  She is hurt by rock remover
 and bright light.  She tends to overlook intruders, which she may notice from
 200 feet.  She usually appears with a friend.  She may carry a chest, weapon, 
 garment, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to batter you for
 3d7 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Lost soul  (Light Blue 'G')
=== Num:107  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:9  Ac:10  Exp:61
It is almost insubstantial.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 15 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 138.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self or drain mana; 1 time in 16.  It can pass through walls, pick up
 objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry
 one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can 
 hit to hurt you for 2d9 damage and touch to reduce wisdom from you.  

The Night ogre  (Deep Light Blue 'O')
=== Num:1008  Lev:15  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:99  Ac:33  Exp:61
A massive orc-like figure with night blue skin and powerful arms.  This evil
 mix of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 138.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which create darkness; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It resists 
 darkness.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, armour
 , garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you
for 2d8 damage and hit to hurt and poison you for 2d10 damage.  

The Zombified lion  (Yellow 'z')
=== Num:1171  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:67  Ac:24  Exp:61
How difficult is it to stop a lion that hunts beyond the grave?  This evil
 undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 138.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain
 strength.  It is cold blooded.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, charmed or slept.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It can bite to 
 hurt and poison you for 1d9 damage and claw to wound you for 1d5 damage.  

The Skeleton naga  (Green 's')
=== Num:1289  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:37  Ac:40  Exp:61
A large skeleton serpent with the remainder of a female's torso.  This evil
 undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 138.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to freeze you for 2d6 damage; 1
 time in 9.  It can bash down doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, 
 cold and poison.  It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 180 feet.  It may carry a 
 weapon, armour, adornment or treasure.  It can crush to wound you for 1d8 
 damage and spit to freeze you for 2d6 damage.  

The Baby diamond dragon  (Blue Slate 'd')
=== Num:759  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:30  Exp:63
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a clear hue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 15
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 143.18 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 frost or mana powerfully; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and track you
 over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  
 It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3
gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Baby chromatic dragon  (Violet 'd')
=== Num:1117  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:113  Ac:30  Exp:63
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales shimmering with hints of many different colours.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 143.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may breathe lightning, fire or poison powerfully; 1
 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to lightning, fire and poison.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.
It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Haunted helmet  (Slate ']')
=== Num:1199  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:84  Ac:25  Exp:63
A helmet filled with undead druj, glowing with magic and floating in thin air.  
 This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves
 quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase
 intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth 143.18 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce mana bolts, recover mana, create
 darkness, curse you, cause wounds, summon an undead or slow; 1 time in 1.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a special object or treasure.
It can touch to confuse you for 3d3 damage.  

The Tiger  (Orange 'f')
=== Num:166  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:61  Ac:40  Exp:64
One of the largest of its species, a sleek orange and black shape creeps
 towards you, ready to pounce.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 15 and moves quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 145.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It can claw to wound you for
 1d6 damage, claw to wound you for 1d6 damage and bite to wound you for 1d10 
 damage.  

The Griffon  (Umber 'H')
=== Num:200  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:131  Ac:15  Exp:65
A creature bearing the wings and head of an eagle on the body of a great lion. 
 It builds its nests of gold, and guards them jealously.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 147.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.
It can claw to wound you for 3d4 damage and peck to wound you for 2d6 damage.  

The Mirkwood ogre  (Light Teal 'O')
=== Num:1009  Lev:15  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:108  Ac:33  Exp:67
A massive orc-like figure with green skin and powerful arms.  This evil mix of 
 orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 15 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 152.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 may create an arrow to hurt and poison you for 4d6 damage; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells which produce poison balls, create darkness or 
 summon spiders; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, bash down doors, pick up
 objects, climb on walls and ceilings and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry a chest, weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, 
 edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 2d8 damage
 and hit to hurt and poison you for 2d10 damage.  

The Giant glowing rat  (Orange 'r')
=== Num:1043  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:6  Ac:24  Exp:18
It is a rodent of unusual size.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 16 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 42.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may spit to electrify you for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 6.  It can can
 eat bodies to regain strength.  It lights up the surroundings.  It breeds
 explosively.  It is immune to lightning.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to electrify you for 2d6 damage
 and spit to electrify you for 2d6 damage.  

The Giant amethyst dragonfl|y|y|ies|  (Violet 'I')
=== Num:912  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:44  Ac:20  Exp:57
This glistening amethyst dragonfly seems to dart back and forth in time.  This
 mix of dragon and insect is normally found on dungeon level 16 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 134.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe time; 1 time in 7.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry a gem stone.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Half-ogre  (Light Umber 'O')
=== Num:1013  Lev:16  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:165  Ac:33  Exp:67
A giant half-human orc-like figure.  This evil mix of man, orc and giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 16 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 158.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It needs lite to see you.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, armour, garment, 
 tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 1d8 
 damage, hit to batter you for 1d8 damage and hit to batter you for 1d8 damage.


The Giant brown tick  (Umber 'S')
=== Num:552  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:73  Ac:50  Exp:70
It is moving slowly towards you.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 16 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 165.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.
It can bite to hurt and poison you for 2d6 damage and sting to blind you for
 1d1 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Black mamba  (Light Dark 'J')
=== Num:155  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:43  Ac:32  Exp:71
It has glistening black skin, a sleek body and highly venomous fangs.  This 
 animal is normally found on dungeon level 16 and moves somewhat erratically
 and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 167.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may spit to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage; 1 time in 4.
It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage and spit to hurt and poison you
for 4d4 damage.  

The Bright green jell|y|y|ies|  (Light Green 'j')
=== Num:923  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:207  Ac:1  Exp:71
It is smarter than your average jelly.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 16 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and
 does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 167.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 is magical, casting spells which teleport-self, drain mana or summon a monster
 ; 1 time in 9.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists blindness.
It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to 
 dissolve you for 1d2 damage.  

The Killer bronze beetle  (Light Umber 'K')
=== Num:951  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:82  Ac:45  Exp:72
It is a giant beetle of scintillating appearance.  This insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 16 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 170.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 fly over obstacles.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one
 or two precious metals.  It can bite to confuse you for 4d5 damage.  

The Giant pink scorpion  (Magenta-Pink 'S')
=== Num:218  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:45  Ac:44  Exp:73
It is fast and poisonous.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 16
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 172.55 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, climb on walls and ceilings and track you unerringly over land, but not
 through water.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can 
 bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage and sting to reduce strength and size from you
for 2d8 damage.  

The Paladin  (Slate 'p')
=== Num:581  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:83  Ac:40  Exp:73
A warrior for a holy cause.  Unfortunately, her godesssheshe  This woman
 warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 16 and moves at normal speed
 , but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 172.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which heal-self, cure-self, 
 incur heroism, terrify, blind or slow; 1 time in 4.  She can carry a lite to
 see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She needs lite to
 see you.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from
 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, armours, garments, lites, 
 adornments, written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to
hurt you for 4d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 4d5 damage.  

The Killer brass beetle  (Orange 'K')
=== Num:950  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:55  Exp:73
It is a giant beetle with a shiny brass carapace.  This insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 16 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 172.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may 
 spit to dissolve you for 4d4 damage; 1 time in 9.  It can bash down doors and 
 fly over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid
 .  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.
It may carry one or two precious metals.  It can bite to hurt you for 3d4 
 damage and spit to dissolve you for 4d4 damage.  

The Slinger  (Deep Light Blue 't')
=== Num:1195  Lev:16  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:15  Exp:73
A skilled and experienced slinger whipping missiles at you with deadly accuracy.
This woman archer is normally found on dungeon level 16 and moves at normal
 speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 172.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous
 at her native depth.  She may create a shot to hurt you; 1 time in 1.  She can 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She takes a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a
 friend.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, garment, tool, lite, 
 adornment, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt
you for 1d9 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d9 damage.  

The Sphinx  (Mustard 'H')
=== Num:1354  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:159  Ac:60  Exp:74
It will eat you if you cannot answer its riddle.   This mix of man and animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 16 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 174.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which recover mana, terrify or confuse; 1 time in
 4.  It can open doors, bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two treasures.  It can claw to hurt
you for 2d6 damage and claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Wererat  (Deep Light Blue 'r')
=== Num:189  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:89  Ac:10  Exp:75
A large rat with glowing red eyes.  The wererat is a disgusting creature,
 relishing in filth and disease.  This evil animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 16 and moves quickly, but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 177.27 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce poison balls, produce frost bolts, 
 blink-self or cause wounds; 1 time in 8.  It can open doors and can eat bodies
 to regain strength.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice
 from 100 feet.  It may carry a treasure.  It can bite to infect you with
 disease for 2d9 damage.  

The Acid hound  (Slate 'Z')
=== Num:241  Lev:16  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:63  Ac:30  Exp:75
Liquid footprints follow this hound as it pads around the dungeon.  An acrid
 smell of acid rises from the dog's pelt.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 16 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 177.27 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe acid; 1 time in 10.  It
 can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.
It is immune to acid.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice
 from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to dissolve you for
 2d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage and claw to hurt you for 3d3 
 damage.  

The Black eye  (Light Dark 'e')
=== Num:588  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:67  Ac:6  Exp:76
A huge disembodied eye.  As you stare into the black nothingness of its pupil,
 you feel your will and vitality draining away, and are unable to do anything
 except approach it in horrified fascination.  This evil creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 16 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 179.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may gaze to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you or gaze to 
 drain experience (by 10d6+) from you; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting
 spells which teleport to or paralyze; 1 time in 6.  It can communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze 
 to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you and gaze to drain experience (by
 10d6+) from you.  

The Giant mottled termite  (Orange 'a')
=== Num:692  Lev:16  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:98  Ac:50  Exp:76
It looks like an ant, but with shorter legs and bigger fangs. It has a mottled
 well-camouflagued exoskeleton.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level
 16 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 179.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It can bash down doors.  It is invisible.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  
 It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  
 It usually appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d10 damage.  

The Wrinkled mold  (Light Slate 'm')
=== Num:977  Lev:16  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:138  Ac:24  Exp:78
It is a strange wrinkled growth on the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 16 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 184.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can touch to take 
 you back in time for 3d4 damage and touch to take you back in time for 3d4 
 damage.  

[U] Ulfast, Son of Ulfang  (Magenta-Pink 't')
=== Num:211  Lev:16  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:313  Ac:40  Exp:430
A short and swarthy Easterling.  This evil man warrior is normally found on
 dungeon level 16 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth
 1016.36 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native
 depth.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry a good weapon, 
 garment, tool, lite, adornment, musical item, potion or edible item.  He can 
 hit to wound you for 3d5 damage, hit to wound you for 3d5 damage, hit to wound
you for 3d5 damage and hit to wound you for 3d5 damage.  

The Wrinkled mushroom patch|||es|  (Light Slate ',')
=== Num:656  Lev:17  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:28  Ac:1  Exp:12
Yum!  It looks quite tasty.  This plant is normally found on dungeon level 17
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 29.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is not threatening at its native depth.  It may 
 release spores to take you back in time for 3d9 damage and may grow ammunition
 ; 1 time in 9.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may
 notice from 20 feet.  It can release spores to take you back in time for 3d9 
 damage.  

The Brass dragon bat  (Orange 'b')
=== Num:727  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+20  Hp:13  Ac:28  Exp:16
It is a sharp-tailed bat, dripping in acid.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 39.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may breathe acid or disenchantment; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It is immune
 to acid.  It resists disenchantment.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to 
 dissolve you for 1d3 damage.  

The Homuncul|us|us|i|  (Yellow 'u')
=== Num:201  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:34  Ac:32  Exp:19
It is a small demonic spirit full of malevolence.  This evil demon is normally
 found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 46.64 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which drain mana or curse you; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors
 and bash down doors.  It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be 
 frightened.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can hit to remove enchantments
 from you for 1d2 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Diseased mass  (Teal 'w')
=== Num:1107  Lev:17  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:36  Ac:12  Exp:47
A sickening mound of decaying flesh, bones, hands and so on. It seems to be
 growing.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 17 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign
 to chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth 115.36 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt
 by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is observant of intruders, which it may notice
 from 700 feet.  It can touch to infect you with disease for 1d6 damage and 
 touch to reduce constitution from you for 1d6 damage.  

The Undead mass  (Mustard 'w')
=== Num:1337  Lev:17  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:36  Ac:12  Exp:47
A sickening mound of decaying flesh, bones, hands and so on. It seems to be
 growing.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 17 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 115.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  
 It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 700 feet.  It can touch to infect you with disease 
 for 1d6 damage and touch to reduce constitution from you for 1d6 damage.  

The Nether eye  (Light Green 'e')
=== Num:794  Lev:17  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:89  Ac:6  Exp:53
A disembodied eye, sucking life from the world.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 130.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening
 at its native depth.  It may gaze to blast you with nether for 6d6 damage; 1
 time in 7 and is also magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 7.  
 It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot
 move underwater or through webs.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists 
 nether.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to blast you with nether for 6d6 
 damage.  

The Giant ruby frog  (Red 'F')
=== Num:815  Lev:17  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:26  Ac:20  Exp:57
It looks poisonous.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 17 and
 moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 139.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  
 It may spit to reduce strength and size from you for 1d4 damage; 1 time in 7.  
 It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and swim under water
 .  It breeds explosively.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage and spit to 
 reduce strength and size from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Baby brass dragon  (Umber 'd')
=== Num:757  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:61
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales a pale brass.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 17
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 149.73 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid.  It resists 
 disenchantment.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 3 precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d3 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage.  

The Uruk  (Light Blue 'o')
=== Num:226  Lev:17  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:144  Ac:50  Exp:75
A cunning orc of power, as tall as a man, and stronger.  She fears little.  
 This evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed,
 but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 184.09 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 3d6 
 damage; 1 time in 8.  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  She resists darkness.  She takes
 a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually
 appears in groups.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, armour, garment, 
 tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d5 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

The Orc captain  (Light Yellow 'o')
=== Num:206  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:98  Ac:59  Exp:77
An armoured orc with an air of authority.  This evil orc warrior is normally
 found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 189.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may 
 create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 3d7 damage; 1 time in 8.  She can open
 doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  She
 resists darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry a weapon, 
 missile weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage and hit
to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

The Disenchanter worm mass|||es|  (Light Purple 'w')
=== Num:430  Lev:17  Rar:6  Spd:+0  Hp:45  Ac:5  Exp:77
It is a strange mass of squirming worms.  Magical energy crackles around its
 disgusting form.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves
 somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 189.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 deadly at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune
 to lightning.  It resists disenchantment, blindness, magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 70 feet.  It can crawl to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 1d8 damage.  

The Undead eye  (Light Teal 'e')
=== Num:798  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:147  Ac:6  Exp:77
A disembodied eye, with a dead stare.  This evil undead creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 189.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to drain experience (by 20d6+)
 from you for 10d6 damage; 1 time in 7 and is also magical, casting spells
 which produce nether beams, drain mana or summon an undead; 1 time in 7.  It
 can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  
 It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists nether.  It cannot be frightened.
It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can 
 gaze to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 10d6 damage.  

The 2-headed hydra  (Umber 'y')
=== Num:216  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:176  Ac:60  Exp:79
A strange reptilian hybrid with two heads.  This mix of animal and dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 193.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which terrify; 1 time in 11.  It can bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 resists blindness.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two treasures.  It can bite to hurt you 
 for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Baby emerald dragon  (Light Green 'd')
=== Num:760  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:30  Exp:79
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a clear emerald.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 17
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 193.91 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 poison or force powerfully; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 
 gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Screaming skull  (Light Green 's')
=== Num:1110  Lev:17  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:76  Ac:30  Exp:79
A flying skull possessed by a terrible spirit.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves quickly, but is larger or faster
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 193.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may 
 shriek to terrify you; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which recover mana, blink-self or teleport to; 1 time in 3.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists blindness and 
 edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 damage and 
 shriek to terrify you.  

The Lurker  (White '^')
=== Num:188  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:285  Ac:25  Exp:81
A strange creature that merges with the dungeon floor, trapping its victims by
 enveloping them within its perfectly disguised form.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 198.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It
 can envelope to hurt you for 4d8 damage and envelope to hurt you for 4d8 
 damage.  

The Cold vort|ex|ex|ices|  (White 'v')
=== Num:254  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:81
A twisting whirlpool of frost.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 17 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 198.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  
 and may breathe frost powerfully; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can envelope 
 to freeze you for 3d3 damage.  

The Energy vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Blue 'v')
=== Num:255  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:81
A shimmering tornado of energy, sparks crackle along its length.  This creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves somewhat erratically at normal
 speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 198.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.   and may breathe lightning powerfully; 1 time in 2 and
 is also magical, casting spells which produce lightening beams; 1 time in 2.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning and blunt weapons.  It resists plasma
 and blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can 
 envelope to electrify you for 3d3 damage.  

The Quasit  (Orange 'u')
=== Num:212  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:30  Exp:83
The chaotic evil master's favourite pet.  This evil demon is normally found on
 dungeon level 17 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 203.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport-self, give
 invisibility, teleport-self to, teleport to, push through floor or ceiling, 
 terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 10.  It can open doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two 
 weapons, armours or written items.  It can bite to reduce dexterity and
 agility from you for 1d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and claw to 
 hurt you for 1d3 damage.  

The Werebat  (Deep Light Blue 'b')
=== Num:732  Lev:17  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:88  Ac:15  Exp:83
It is a huge black bat with eyes that glow with intelligence.  This evil animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 203.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d6 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d10 damage.  

The Fire vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Red 'v')
=== Num:252  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:85
A whirling maelstrom of fire.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level
 17 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed, but is larger or faster
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 208.64 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.   and may
 breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire and blunt weapons.  It resists 
 lava, plasma and blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.
It can envelope to burn you for 3d3 damage.  

The Black wol|f|f|ves|  (Light Dark 'C')
=== Num:752  Lev:17  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:74  Ac:30  Exp:85
A large and muscled wolf from the eastern wastes.  Its saliva dripscaustically
 and its fur is bileous with acid.   This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 17 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 208.64 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over land,
 but not through water.  It is immune to acid.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage and bite to dissolve you for 1d6 damage
 .  

The White wraith  (White 'W')
=== Num:288  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:62  Ac:40  Exp:86
It is a tangible but ghostly form made of white fog.  This evil undead creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 211.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which incur wraithform, create
 darkness or terrify; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison
 .  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two weapons
 , armours, garments, adornments, magical devices, potions or treasures.  It
 can hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage and touch to drain experience (by 20d6+)
 from you.  

The Giant horned toad  (Light Umber 'F')
=== Num:826  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:43  Ac:32  Exp:86
It is ugly and covered in horned warts.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 17 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 211.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may spit to paralyze you for 2d4 damage; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells which haste-self, heal-self, cause mind
 blasting, summon monsters, terrify or blind; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors and swim under water.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d4 
 damage and spit to paralyze you for 2d4 damage.  

The Carnivorous flying monkey  (Light Red 'Y')
=== Num:1327  Lev:17  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:87  Ac:20  Exp:86
It looks fantastic, yet frightening.   This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 17 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 211.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may create a shot to hurt you for 2d5 damage; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors, 
 pick up objects, fly over obstacles, easily evade blows and missiles and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can claw
to hurt you for 1d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d8 damage and bite to hurt 
 you for 5d1 damage.  

The Nether worm mass|||es|  (Light Green 'w')
=== Num:158  Lev:17  Rar:6  Spd:-5  Hp:57  Ac:15  Exp:87
It is a disgusting mass of dark worms, eating each other, the floor, the air,
 you....  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves extremely
 erratically and slowly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 213.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune
 to cold.  It resists nether and blindness.  It cannot be frightened.  It is
 very observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can touch 
 to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you.  

The Cloak mimic  (Green '(')
=== Num:1343  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+20  Hp:26  Ac:40  Exp:87
It resembles a normal cloak until some poor fool ventures too close!   This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves very quickly, but is 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 213.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self; 1 time in 10.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists darkness.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a special
 object or treasure.  It can hit to paralyze you for 5d5 damage and hit to 
 terrify you for 5d5 damage.  

The Crying spirit  (Violet 'G')
=== Num:858  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:22  Ac:20  Exp:88
A ghostly apparition that cries horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 216.00 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self or terrify; 1 time in 12.  It can pass through walls and fly
 over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It may
 carry a garment, tool, musical item, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to 
 terrify you.  

The Killer gold beetle  (Yellow 'K')
=== Num:952  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:82  Ac:45  Exp:88
It is a giant beetle humming with noise.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 17 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 216.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one or two precious metals.  
 It can bite to batter you for 3d4 damage and crush to deafen you for 4d4 
 damage.  

The Skeletal lizard  (Light Yellow 'R')
=== Num:1292  Lev:17  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:32  Ac:65  Exp:89
It is a large animated lizard skeleton.  This evil undead animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 17 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 218.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 150 feet.  It can bite to wound you for 2d8 damage.  

[U] the Barrow-wight of Cardolan  (Light Purple 'W')
=== Num:431  Lev:17  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:76  Ac:40  Exp:110
Sent by the Witch-King of Angmar, this wight guards the tomb of the last prince
 of Cardolan.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 17
 and moves at normal speed.  Destroying this creature is worth 270.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which create darkness, cause wounds, terrify or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It
 resists darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a
 good weapon, armour, garment, adornment, magical device, potion or treasure.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 1d17 damage and touch to drain experience (by
 40d6+) from you.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] the Great Grey Wolf  (Slate 'C')
=== Num:1366  Lev:17  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:214  Ac:60  Exp:490
Among all the wolves you have fought so far, this one stands head and shoulders
 above its kin.  Its fetid breath cloys the air, choking you in terror, and your
 spells seem to slide off its coat as if it was somehow magically protected.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 17 and moves a bit erratically
 and quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1202.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may howl to terrify you;
 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid, 
 cold and poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs
 and wands.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 600 feet.  It usually appears with escorts.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d5 
 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 2d5 damage and howl to terrify you.  
 It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Giant rotting jellyfish  (Mustard 'j')
=== Num:1264  Lev:18  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:85  Ac:30  Exp:84
It is a giant rotting jellyfish.  This undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 18 and moves quickly.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 213.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must swim and cannot
 move out of water.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and 
 poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which it may notice from
 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to eat your food for 2d3 
 damage and touch to reduce charisma from you for 2d3 damage.  

The |M|Wom||an-at-arms||||  (Blue Slate 't')
=== Num:261  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:83  Ac:40  Exp:85
A well-armed warrior who moves with confidence.  This woman warrior is normally
 found on dungeon level 18 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 216.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may 
 create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 10d7 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can 
 carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She
 needs lite to see you.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, 
 garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions, edible items or 
 treasures.  She can hit to wound you for 6d5 damage and hit to wound you for
 6d5 damage.  

The Haradrim warrior  (Light Violet 't')
=== Num:1193  Lev:18  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:83  Ac:40  Exp:85
A scarred warrior who moves with confidence.  This evil woman warrior is
 normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 216.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may 
 create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 10d7 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can 
 carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She
 needs lite to see you.  She cannot be frightened.  She takes quite a while to
 see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a
 friend.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, 
 lites, adornments, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can 
 hit to wound you for 6d5 damage and hit to wound you for 6d5 damage.  

The Phase cat  (Light Green 'f')
=== Num:809  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:43  Ac:30  Exp:86
The cat who could walk through walls.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 18 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 218.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, pass through walls, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  
 It can claw to wound you for 1d8 damage and claw to wound you for 1d8 damage.  
 

The Baby garnet dragon  (Magenta-Pink 'd')
=== Num:1230  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:30  Exp:86
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a pink hue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 18 and
 moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 218.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 disease powerfully; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It resists teleportation.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 3 gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw to 
 hurt you for 1d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Tengu  (Light Pink 'u')
=== Num:145  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:47  Ac:32  Exp:87
It is a fast-moving demon that blinks quickly in and out of existence; no other
 demon matches its teleporting mastery.  This evil demon is normally found on
 dungeon level 18 and moves quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 221.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which blink-self, teleport-self to or teleport to; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and easily evade blows and missiles.  It
 is immune to acid and fire.  It resists teleportation, magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt
you for 1d8 damage.  

The Ice spirit  (Deep Light Blue 'E')
=== Num:807  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:71  Ac:42  Exp:88
A whirlpool of sentient ice.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 18 and moves quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 224.00 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold
 and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed
 or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  
 It can hit to cover you with ice for 3d4 damage.  

The Sharpshooter  (Mustard 't')
=== Num:1201  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:181  Ac:18  Exp:89
A dangerous archer with a longbow and a quiver full of arrows.  This woman
 archer is normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 226.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you; 1 time in 1.  She can open
 doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She takes a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two 
 weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, 
 potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage
 and hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Ring mimic  (White '=')
=== Num:313  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:159  Ac:60  Exp:91
A strange creature that disguises itself as a discarded ring to lure
 unsuspecting adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves quickly, but is faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 231.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 acid bolts, produce lightning bolts, produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, 
 cause wounds, summon a monster, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse; 1
 time in 4.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry a special object
 or treasure.  It can hit to poison you for 3d9 damage and hit to poison you 
 for 3d9 damage.  

The Harpy  (Light Dark 'H')
=== Num:886  Lev:18  Rar:4  Spd:+30  Hp:28  Ac:11  Exp:91
A brazen-clawed bird with a woman's face, fast as the wind, capable of turning
 banquets into foul-smelling scraps in the twinkling of an eye.  This creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves incredibly quickly, but is 
 larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 231.64 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which teleport-self to; 1
 time in 12.  She can fly over obstacles, easily evade blows and missiles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  She is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She can claw to eat your food for 1d1 damage and claw to eat your food for 1d1 
 damage.  

The Grave wight  (Blue 'W')
=== Num:324  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:60  Ac:50  Exp:92
It is a ghostly form with eyes that haunt you.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but
 is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 234.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which create darkness, 
 cause wounds or terrify; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and 
 poison.  It resists darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry one or two weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices
 or potions.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d7 
 damage and touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you.  

The Giant green jellyfish  (Green 'j')
=== Num:1259  Lev:18  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:99  Ac:1  Exp:92
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing green lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 234.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must
 swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can touch to dissolve you for 1d5 damage.  

The Forest ogre  (Light Green 'O')
=== Num:1012  Lev:18  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:141  Ac:33  Exp:93
A giant, primative orc-like figure with an awesomely muscled frame.  This evil
 mix of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 236.73 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, armour, garment, tool, 
 edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 3d8 damage
 and bite to wound you for 2d8 damage.  

The Magpie  (Light Slate 'B')
=== Num:1345  Lev:18  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:41  Ac:20  Exp:94
This piebald bird has evil-looking eyes and a sharp beak, which it aims at your
 eyes as it flies at you!  This evil animal is normally found on dungeon level
 18 and moves quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 239.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, pick up objects and 
 fly over obstacles.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can peck to blind you 
 for 1d10 damage, doubled against eye monsters and peck to blind you for 1d10 
 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Chill  (Light Blue 'G')
=== Num:836  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:21  Ac:19  Exp:95
It is a chilling, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 18 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 241.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce frost bolts; 1 time
 in 12.  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.
It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  
 It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant
 of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry a garment, tool
 , musical item, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to terrify you and claw 
 to freeze you for 1d4 damage.  

The Ghostly wol|f|f|ves|  (White 'C')
=== Num:1284  Lev:18  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:27  Ac:30  Exp:95
The outline of a wolf, howling and snapping at unseen horrors.  This undead 
 animal is normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves a bit erratically and
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is
 worth 241.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track
 you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.
It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage and bite to
freeze you for 1d6 damage.  

The Moaning spirit  (Umber 'G')
=== Num:167  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:22  Ac:20  Exp:96
A ghostly apparition that shrieks horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 244.36 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It may wail to terrify you; 1 time in 16
 and is also magical, casting spells which teleport-self or terrify; 1 time in
 16.  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, 
 junk items or treasures.  It can wail to terrify you and touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 1d8 damage.  

The Guardian naga  (Light Violet 'n')
=== Num:192  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:126  Ac:65  Exp:96
A armed and armoured woman of remarkable beauty, with the lower body of a great
 steel-clad serpent.  Her four arms bear weapons of ancient make, and from
 ancient days has she guarded her trove.  This evil warrior is normally found 
 on dungeon level 18 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger
 or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 244.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may 
 create a spike to hurt you for 10d5 damage; 1 time in 7 and is also magical,
 casting spells which terrify or slow; 1 time in 7.  She can open doors, bash
 down doors and swim under water.  She resists nexus.  She pays very little
 attention to intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up
 to 3 written items, potions or treasures.  She can hit to wound you for 3d10 
 damage and crush to batter you for 3d10 damage.  

The Mummified soldier  (Light Umber 'z')
=== Num:1101  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:77  Ac:35  Exp:96
It is a human figure clothed in wrappings.  A malevolent light glows from where
 its eyes should be.  This evil undead warrior is normally found on dungeon
 level 18 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 244.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can open doors and bash
 down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry a weapon, armour, adornment or magical device.  It can hit to infect
you with disease for 2d4 damage, hit to infect you with disease for 2d4 damage
 and touch to poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Imp  (Green 'u')
=== Num:213  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:30  Exp:97
The lawful evil master's favourite pet.  This evil demon is normally found on
 dungeon level 18 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 246.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport-self, give
 invisibility, teleport-self to, teleport to, push through floor or ceiling, 
 terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 10.  It can open doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire and 
 cold.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  
 It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry one or two weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit to hurt and
 poison you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage.  

The Creeping mithril coins||||  (Light Blue '$')
=== Num:175  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:50  Exp:98
It appears to be a pile of sentient mithril coins that doesn't like being
 picked up.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves at
 normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 249.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant
 of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may carry up to 5 precious
 metals.  It can hit to batter you for 4d5 damage and touch to remove 
 enchantments from you.  

The Hummerhorn  (Light Yellow 'I')
=== Num:210  Lev:18  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:25  Ac:14  Exp:98
A giant buzzing wasp, its stinger drips venom.  This insect is normally found 
 on dungeon level 18 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 249.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It can fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can sting
to hurt and poison you for 2d2 damage and bite to confuse you for 2d2 damage.  

The Cadaver  (Orange 'z')
=== Num:1100  Lev:18  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:92  Ac:20  Exp:98
A walking corpse, it bears the marks of many horrific experiments  conducted
 upon it by nameless necromancers.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 18 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 249.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It may carry a weapon, armour, 
 adornment, magical device or treasure.  It can bite to infect you with disease
for 6d2 damage, hit to infect you with disease for 3d3 damage and hit to infect
you with disease for 3d3 damage.  

The Dwarf high priest||ess|s|  (White 'h')
=== Num:1194  Lev:18  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:171  Ac:28  Exp:98
A stocky, white-bearded dwarf with a pious but haughty expression.  Stauch is
 she to defend the temples of her people; to her, all intruders are enemies.  
 This evil priest is normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves at normal
 speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 249.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous
 at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce balls of light, heal-self, cure-self, incur heroism, terrify, blind or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 3.  She can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects
 .  She resists blindness.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with a friend.  She may carry
 one or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written
 items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d5 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

[U] Nar, the Dwarf  (Yellow 'h')
=== Num:215  Lev:18  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:387  Ac:70  Exp:710
The friend and companion of the dwarven king Thror, he went mad with grief
 after Thror's death at the hands of Azog the Orc.  With torn beard and ragged
 clothes, he seems to have fixed on you as a convenient target to vent his anger.
This dwarf is normally found on dungeon level 18 and moves at normal speed.  
 Killing this creature is worth 1807.27 points for a 1st level character.  He
 is dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells which 
 heal-self, cause mind blasting, blind or confuse; 1 time in 5.  He can open
 doors and bash down doors.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He resists 
 blindness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 250 feet.  He may carry one or two good 
 weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 3d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 
 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Baby sapphire dragon  (Light Blue 'd')
=== Num:761  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:30  Exp:85
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a clear sapphire.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level
 19 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 224.09 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may
 breathe lightning or gravity powerfully; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 3 gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw to 
 hurt you for 1d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Baby ruby dragon  (Purple 'd')
=== Num:762  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:30  Exp:85
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a clear ruby.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 19
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 224.09 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 fire or inertia powerfully; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 
 gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Ghoulish soul  (Green 'G')
=== Num:852  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:49  Ac:10  Exp:95
It is almost insubstantial.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 19 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 250.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self or drain mana; 1 time in 7.  It can pass through walls, pick up
 objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may
 carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It
 can hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage and touch to infect you with disease.  

The Carrion crawler  (Orange 'c')
=== Num:281  Lev:19  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:120  Ac:40  Exp:96
A hideous centipede covered in slime and with glowing tentacles around its head.
This undead insect is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 253.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, climb on walls and
 ceilings and dig through earth and rubble.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can 
 sting to paralyze you for 2d13 damage.  

The Eye of chaos  (Light Purple 'e')
=== Num:799  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:156  Ac:6  Exp:96
A disembodied eye, surrounded by chaotic energies.  This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster or older deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 253.09 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to blast you with chaos for
 11d6 damage; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 chaos balls or drain mana; 1 time in 3.  It can communicate telepathically
 with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  
 It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly observant
 of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to blast you with
 chaos for 11d6 damage.  

The Wood elf enchant|er|ress|ers|  (Blue 'l')
=== Num:1275  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:106  Ac:10  Exp:97
A elven spell caster of some power, weaving illusions and   enchantments to
 beguile and frustrate you.  This evil elf mage is normally found on dungeon
 level 19 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 255.73 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which haste-self, recover mana, blink-self, teleport-self, give
 invisibility, create darkness, cause hallucinations, blind, confuse, slow or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 2.  She can carry a lite to see you and open doors.  She
 needs lite to see you.  She resists lite.  She is fairly observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two 
 weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, written items, musical
 items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 5d4 
 damage.  

The Cave ogre  (Blue Slate 'O')
=== Num:287  Lev:19  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:141  Ac:33  Exp:100
A giant orc-like figure with an awesomely muscled frame.  This evil mix of orc
 and giant is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 263.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears with a
 friend.  It may carry a chest, weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, 
 junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 3d8 damage and hit to 
 batter you for 3d8 damage.  

The Giant firefly  (Light Red 'I')
=== Num:593  Lev:19  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:27  Ac:18  Exp:100
Clouds of these monsters light up the dungeon - so brightly that you can barely
 see through them.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves
 extremely erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 263.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It must
 fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can 
 bite to blind you for 1d2 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Hidden tracker  (Yellow 'E')
=== Num:802  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:72  Ac:37  Exp:100
It is impossible to define its form but it hunts you fearlessly.  This evil
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves somewhat erratically
 and quickly, but is faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 263.64 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  
 It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 160 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage, hit to hurt you 
 for 2d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Brigand  (Light Red 't')
=== Num:150  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:103  Ac:32  Exp:110
She is eyeing your backpack.  This evil woman thief is normally found on
 dungeon level 19 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 290.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may create a shot to 
 hurt you for 4d5 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which teleport-self or create darkness; 1 time in 5.  She can 
 carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and hide
 in unusual places.  She needs lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two 
 weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, 
 potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage, 
 hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage and touch to steal items from you.  

The Baby multi-hued dragon  (Violet 'd')
=== Num:151  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:30  Exp:110
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and its
 scales shimmering with hints of many different colours and shades.  This evil 
 dragon is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 290.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost
 or poison powerfully; 1 time in 12.  It can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and 
 poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 3 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 1d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Giant grey scorpion  (Slate 'S')
=== Num:358  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:171  Ac:50  Exp:110
It is a giant grey scorpion.  It looks poisonous.  This insect is normally
 found on dungeon level 19 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 290.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not
 through water.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 can bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 1d4 
 damage.  

The Ranger  (Green 'q')
=== Num:580  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:83  Ac:40  Exp:110
A warrior who is at one with nature.  A master of both bow and sword, with
 minor spellcasting skills, and animals come to do her bidding.  This woman
 warrior mage is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed,
 but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 290.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create an arrow to hurt you for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 1
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce lightning bolts, produce
 frost bolts, cure-self or blink-self; 1 time in 4.  She can carry a lite to
 see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She needs lite to
 see you.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from
 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, magical devices, written items, potions, edible items or treasures
 .  She can hit to hurt you for 5d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d4 damage.  
 

The Bitter soul  (Blue 'G')
=== Num:850  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:33  Ac:10  Exp:110
It chills you bitter cold.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 19 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 290.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self or drain mana; 1 time in 10.  It can pass through walls, pick up
 objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may
 carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It
 can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage and touch to freeze you for 2d4 damage.  

The Giant ebony scorpion  (Light Dark 'S')
=== Num:1052  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:67  Ac:25  Exp:110
A gleaming black scorpion as large as a lion, with a pulsating stinger and two
 great deadly claws.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 19 and
 moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 290.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is rarely detected
 by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d11 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 1d11 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 3d4 
 damage.  

The Dzoo-noo-qua  (Teal 'T')
=== Num:1099  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:50  Exp:110
Once a normal troll, he has become even more horridly deformed by a magical
 disease.  This evil troll is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 290.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is challenging at his native depth.  He can open doors, bash
 down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  He is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  He regenerates quickly.  He is hurt by bright light.  
 He is immune to poison.  He takes quite a while to see intruders, which he may
 notice from 200 feet.  He may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, 
 junk item or treasure.  He can bite to infect you with disease for 2d7 damage, 
 bite to infect you with disease for 2d7 damage, hit to batter you for 2d4 
 damage and hit to batter you for 2d4 damage.  

The Creeping opal gems  (Light Slate '$')
=== Num:1112  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:99  Ac:50  Exp:110
It appears to be a pile of opals, slithering toward you on lots of tiny legs.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed.
A kill of this creature is worth 290.00 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning
 and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may
 carry up to 3 gem stones.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage
 and touch to poison you for 3d5 damage.  

The Animat|or|rix|ors|  (Blue Slate 'q')
=== Num:1280  Lev:19  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:106  Ac:10  Exp:110
A spell caster surrounded by flying daggers.  This evil woman mage is normally
 found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 290.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may 
 create a dagger to hurt you for 4d3 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 2
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which recover mana, 
 blink-self, give invisibility or animate monsters from objects; 1 time in 2.  
 She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and pick up objects.  She needs
 lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, garments, lites, adornments, 
 magical devices, written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can 
 hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage.  

[U] Shagrat, the Orc Captain  (Light Yellow 'o')
=== Num:227  Lev:19  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:352  Ac:60  Exp:540
He is an orc of power and great cunning, leader of a garrison at Cirith Ungol.  
 This evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed.
Killing this creature is worth 1423.64 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 dangerous at his native depth.  He can open doors, bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  He is immune to poison.  He resists 
 darkness.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200
 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, 
 missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 3d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

[U] Gorbag, the Orc Captain  (Light Yellow 'o')
=== Num:228  Lev:19  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:352  Ac:60  Exp:540
He is an orc of power and great cunning, leader of a garrison at Cirith Ungol.  
 This evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 19 and moves at normal speed.
Killing this creature is worth 1423.64 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 dangerous at his native depth.  He can open doors, bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  He is immune to poison.  He resists 
 darkness.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200
 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, 
 missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 3d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

The Earth hound  (Umber 'Z')
=== Num:238  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:63  Ac:30  Exp:27
A beautiful crystalline shape does not disguise the danger this hound clearly
 presents.  Your flesh tingles as it approaches.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 73.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe shards; 1
 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, dig through earth and rubble and track
 you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It resists edged weapons.  
 It cannot be cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d12 
 damage and claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage.  

The Algroth  (Orange 'T')
=== Num:293  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:120  Ac:60  Exp:84
A powerful troll form.  Venom drips from its needlelike claws.  This evil troll
 is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 , older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 229.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 11d5 damage; 1
 time in 20.  It can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can claw to hurt and poison you for 2d10 damage, bite to hurt 
 you for 1d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Vampire bat  (Light Violet 'b')
=== Num:272  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:46  Ac:40  Exp:110
A blood-sucking bat that flies at your neck hungrily.  This evil undead animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves somewhat erratically and
 quickly.  Destruction of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is cold blooded.  It regenerates quickly.  It
 is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to drain experience (by 40d6+) from 
 you for 1d4 damage.  

The Troll priest||ess|s|  (Light Blue 'T')
=== Num:279  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:110
A troll who is so bright she knows how to read.  This evil troll priest is
 normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which cure-self, blink-self, 
 create darkness, cause wounds, incur heroism or terrify; 1 time in 5.  She can 
 open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 over land, but not through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which
 she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible
 item, junk item or treasure.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 1d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d4 damage.  

The Smoke spirit  (Light Red 'E')
=== Num:805  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+20  Hp:30  Ac:60  Exp:110
A whirlwind of sentient smoke.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves very quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 fly over obstacles.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can hit to burn you for 2d5 
 damage.  

The Brass monkey  (Orange 'Y')
=== Num:833  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:60  Ac:30  Exp:110
It is a large brass statue cast in the shape of a monkey.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may shriek to do you no effect; 1 time in 7.  It can bash
 down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison
 .  It resists disenchantment.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a precious metal.  It can 
 hit to hurt you for 1d8 damage, hit to dissolve you for 2d4 damage and shriek 
 to do you no effect.  

The Killer borer beetle  (Light Slate 'K')
=== Num:954  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:114  Ac:70  Exp:110
It is a beetle with sharp mandibles and an explosive attack.  This insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d6 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 4d6 damage.  

The Ogre sergeant  (Orange 'O')
=== Num:1014  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:134  Ac:56  Exp:110
A massive armoured figure who barks out commands.  This evil mix of orc and 
 giant is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land,
 but not through water.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may
 notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry a 
 chest, weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She
 can hit to batter you for 2d10 damage, hit to batter you for 2d10 damage and 
 hit to batter you for 2d10 damage.  

The Swamp ogre  (Light Blue 'O')
=== Num:1032  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:141  Ac:33  Exp:110
A giant orc-like figure with an awesomely muscled frame and slimey skin.  This
 evil mix of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash down
 doors, swim under water and track you over land, but not through water.  It is
 immune to acid and poison.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a chest
 , weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can 
 hit to batter you for 3d8 damage and bite to infect you with disease for 2d8 
 damage.  

The Phase spider  (Light Purple 'S')
=== Num:1050  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:25  Exp:110
A spider that never seems quite there.  Everywhere you look it is just
 half-seen in the corner of one eye.  This insect is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, pass through walls and 
 climb on walls and ceilings.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It appears
 in a giant web.  It is immune to poison.  It resists nexus.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d8 damage, bite to hurt and poison 
 you for 1d6 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for 1d6 damage.  

The Flaming skull  (Red 's')
=== Num:1109  Lev:20  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:61  Ac:30  Exp:110
A fiery-wreathed skull possessed by an infernal spirit.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce fire bolts, recover
 mana, blink-self, teleport to or terrify; 1 time in 3.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is immune to fire and poison.  It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears with a
 friend.  It can bite to burn you for 2d4 damage and trample to batter you for
 2d6 damage.  

The Wand mimic  (White '-')
=== Num:1149  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:286  Ac:40  Exp:110
A strange creature that disguises itself as a wand to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its venomous teeth.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 shard balls, produce poison bolts, produce mana bolts, produce lightening beams
 , summon a monster, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 3.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may
 notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It
 can bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage, bite to hurt and poison you 
 for 4d4 damage, trample to confuse you for 4d4 damage and claw to confuse you 
 for 4d4 damage.  

The Hashishin  (Light Pink 't')
=== Num:1175  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:96  Ac:22  Exp:110
A grey-clad figure, knives in hand, moving with speed.  She has you in her
 sights.  This evil woman is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves
 quickly, but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is challenging at her native depth.  She may create a dart to poison you for
 10d5 damage; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which create darkness or blind; 1 time in 3.  She can open doors, bash down
 doors and pick up objects.  She cannot be charmed or slept.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one
 or two weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions, 
 edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt and poison you for 2d6 damage
 and hit to wound you for 2d6 damage.  

The Runestone mimic  (Green '?')
=== Num:1303  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:286  Ac:40  Exp:110
A strange creature that disguises itself as a runestone to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its venomous teeth.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 shard balls, produce poison bolts, produce mana bolts, produce lightening beams
 , summon a monster, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 3.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may
 notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It
 can bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage, bite to hurt and poison you 
 for 4d4 damage, trample to confuse you for 4d4 damage and claw to confuse you 
 for 4d4 damage.  

The Huorn  (Teal ':')
=== Num:1359  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:251  Ac:45  Exp:110
A very strong near-sentient tree, which has become hostile to other living
 things.   This plant is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to
 chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 300.00 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which blink-self or teleport to; 1 time in 9.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold.  It resists water and blunt
 weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry a special
 object or treasure.  It can crush to hurt you for 3d6 damage, crush to hurt 
 you for 3d6 damage, crush to hurt you for 3d6 damage and crush to hurt you for
 3d6 damage.  

The Fire spirit  (Magenta-Pink 'E')
=== Num:220  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:47  Ac:30  Exp:120
A whirlwind of sentient flame.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 327.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can bash down doors.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire and poison.  It resists lava, 
 plasma, blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed, slept, slowed or paralyzed.  It takes a while to see intruders, which
 it may notice from 160 feet.  It can hit to burn you for 2d6 damage and hit to
burn you for 2d6 damage.  

The Killer fire beetle  (Light Red 'K')
=== Num:291  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:91  Ac:45  Exp:120
It is a giant beetle wreathed in flames.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 327.27 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to burn you for 4d5 damage
 ; 1 time in 9.  It can bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 3d4 
 damage, bite to burn you for 4d5 damage and spit to burn you for 4d5 damage.  

The Ogre mage  (Red 'O')
=== Num:296  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:150  Ac:40  Exp:120
A hideous ogre wrapped in black sorcerous robes.  This evil mix of orc and 
 giant is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 327.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce frost balls, 
 heal-self, create traps, summon a monster or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can 
 open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  
 It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry one or two chests, weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items
 , junk items or treasures.  It can hit to batter you for 3d8 damage and hit to
batter you for 3d8 damage.  

The Young blue dragon  (Blue 'd')
=== Num:314  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:243  Ac:50  Exp:120
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a deep
 blue in hue.  Sparks crackle along its length.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 327.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe lightning powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also
 magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw
to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Young white dragon  (White 'd')
=== Num:315  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:243  Ac:50  Exp:120
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a frosty
 white in hue.  Icy blasts of cold air come from it as it breathes.  This evil 
 dragon is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 327.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe frost powerfully; 1 time in 10
 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.
It is immune to cold.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt 
 you for 2d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite to hurt you for
 2d6 damage.  

The Penitent  (Slate 's')
=== Num:525  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:128  Ac:35  Exp:120
A skeletal form, which brings back the dead from beyond the grave...  This evil
 undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed
 , but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 327.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which recover mana, curse you, cause wounds or animate monsters from dead
 bodies; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  
 It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists blindness and edged
 weapons.  It cannot be cut.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry one or two weapons, armours, 
 adornments or treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 4d5 damage and touch to 
 drain mana from you for 1d5 damage, plus spell points.  

The Killer scarab beetle  (Light Blue 'K')
=== Num:953  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:105  Ac:85  Exp:120
It is a beetle with sharp mandibles and a steely carapace.  This insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 327.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire
 and poison.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 140 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d6 
 damage.  

The Giant spotted jellyfish  (Blue Slate 'j')
=== Num:1262  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:56  Ac:18  Exp:120
It is a giant jellyfish covered in discoloured blotches.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 327.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must
 swim and cannot move out of water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can 
 touch to dissolve you for 6d6 damage.  

The Globefish  (Violet 'F')
=== Num:1363  Lev:20  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:52  Ac:30  Exp:120
This fish is among the most poisonous creatures there are.   This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 20 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 327.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 poison powerfully; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors.  It must swim and
 cannot move out of water.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be stunned.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 10d5 
 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for 10d5 damage.  

[U] the First Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:624  Lev:20  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:200  Ac:100  Exp:440
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1200.00 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage, claw to wound you for 1d10 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d10 damage.  

[U] the Second Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:625  Lev:20  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:208  Ac:100  Exp:480
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1309.09 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage, claw to wound you for 1d11 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d11 damage.  

[U] the Third Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:626  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:216  Ac:100  Exp:560
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1527.27 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d9 damage, claw to wound you for 1d12 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d12 damage.  

[U] the Fourth Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:627  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:224  Ac:100  Exp:600
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1636.36 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d9 damage, claw to wound you for 1d13 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d13 damage.  

[U] the Fifth Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:628  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:232  Ac:100  Exp:670
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1827.27 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d10 damage, claw to wound you for 1d14 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d14 damage.  

[U] the Sixth Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:629  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:240  Ac:100  Exp:720
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1963.64 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d10 damage, claw to wound you for 1d15 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d15 damage.  

[U] the Seventh Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:630  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:248  Ac:100  Exp:790
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 2154.55 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d11 damage, claw to wound you for 1d16 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d16 damage.  

[U] the Eighth Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:631  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:256  Ac:100  Exp:860
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 2345.45 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d11 damage, claw to wound you for 1d17 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d17 damage.  

[U] the Ninth Black Cat of Queen Beruthiel  (Light Dark 'f')
=== Num:632  Lev:20  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:264  Ac:100  Exp:940
It is a huge cat, black as night.  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 20 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 2563.64 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It resists darkness.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage, claw to wound you for 1d18 
 damage and claw to wound you for 1d18 damage.  

The Baby amethyst dragon  (Light Violet 'd')
=== Num:758  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:123  Ac:30  Exp:99
This hatchling dragon is still soft, its eyes unaccustomed to light and  its
 scales a clear amethyst.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level
 21 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 279.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may
 breathe acid or time powerfully; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3
gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d4 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage.  

The Sabre-tooth tiger  (Yellow 'f')
=== Num:240  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:135  Ac:50  Exp:120
A fierce and dangerous cat, its huge tusks and sharp claws would lacerate even
 the strongest armour.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 21 and
 moves quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 338.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It can claw to wound you for
 1d10 damage and bite to wound you for 1d16 damage.  

The Barrow wight  (Light Purple 'W')
=== Num:337  Lev:21  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:76  Ac:40  Exp:120
It is a ghostly nightmare of a entity.  This evil undead creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 338.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It is magical, casting spells which create darkness, cause wounds, terrify or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It
 resists darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It may carry a weapon, armour, garment, adornment, magical device, 
 potion or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d17 damage and touch to drain
experience (by 40d6+) from you.  

The Hairy horror  (Mud 'H')
=== Num:887  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:201  Ac:45  Exp:120
A ghastly hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly those with
 fur and hair.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 338.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d7 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d5 damage
 , sting to hurt you for 1d5 damage and crush to hurt you for 2d3 damage.  

The Empress naga  (Light Umber 'n')
=== Num:990  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:165  Ac:65  Exp:120
A lordly snake-like figure with a woman's torso.  This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed
 , but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 338.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may spit to poison you for 2d8 damage; 1 time in 7 and is
 also magical, casting spells which heal-self or summon similar monsters; 1
 time in 7.  She can open doors and bash down doors.  She resists 
 disenchantment.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which she may
 notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up to 3 written items, potions or 
 treasures.  She can crush to hurt you for 2d8 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d8 
 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d8 damage and spit to poison you for 2d8 damage.


The Staff mimic  (White '_')
=== Num:1146  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:321  Ac:40  Exp:120
A strange creature that disguises itself as a staff to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 338.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may shriek to blind you for 4d4 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 which create darkness, create traps, drain mana, summon a monster, cause
 amnesia, terrify, blind, confuse or slow; 1 time in 3.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It can bite to 
 hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage
 , trample to confuse you for 4d4 damage and shriek to blind you for 4d4 
 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Skeletal spider  (Light Yellow 'S')
=== Num:1293  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:54  Ac:16  Exp:120
It is a fast-moving skeletal spider.  This evil undead insect is normally found 
 on dungeon level 21 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 338.18 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and climb on
 walls and ceilings.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  
 It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed, slept or cut.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may
 notice from 80 feet.  It can bite to hurt you for 1d10 damage and bite to 
 wound you for 1d10 damage.  

The Song book mimic  (Yellow '?')
=== Num:1301  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:566  Ac:40  Exp:120
A strange creature that disguises itself as a song book to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its insidious music.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 338.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to drain life from you for 4d4 
 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce sound
 balls, summon a demon or cause hallucinations; 1 time in 5.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It can bite to 
 wound you for 4d4 damage, bite to batter you for 4d4 damage, trample to curse 
 you for 4d4 damage and spit to drain life from you for 4d4 damage.  

The Map mimic  (Light Umber '?')
=== Num:1302  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:321  Ac:40  Exp:120
A strange creature that disguises itself as a map to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 338.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may shriek to blind you for 4d4 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 which create darkness, create traps, drain mana, summon a monster, cause
 amnesia, terrify, blind, confuse or slow; 1 time in 3.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It can bite to 
 hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage
 , trample to confuse you for 4d4 damage and shriek to blind you for 4d4 
 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Young green dragon  (Green 'd')
=== Num:316  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:243  Ac:50  Exp:130
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a deep
 green in hue.  Foul gas seeps through its scales.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 366.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may breathe poison powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is
 also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3
adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 2d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Spook  (Light Green 'G')
=== Num:837  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:27  Ac:21  Exp:130
It is a spooky, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 21 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 366.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain mana or terrify; 1
 time in 12.  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt
 weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one
 or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can touch 
 to terrify you for 1d6 damage and touch to terrify you for 1d6 damage.  

The Gnomish wizard  (Red 'h')
=== Num:1207  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:193  Ac:15  Exp:130
A wielder of strange magics and arcane forces.  This evil creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 21 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 366.36 points for a
 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce balls of light, invoke darkness
 storms, produce confusion balls, produce chaos balls, haste-self, recover mana
 , blink-self, confuse or slow; 1 time in 2.  She can open doors.  She is
 fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may
 carry up to 3 weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, 
 written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you 
 for 2d5 damage.  

The Giant purple jellyfish  (Purple 'j')
=== Num:1261  Lev:21  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:234  Ac:1  Exp:130
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing purple lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 366.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 11
 .  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must swim and
 cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can touch to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you.  

The Skeletal mount  (Light Yellow 'Q')
=== Num:1290  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:73  Ac:35  Exp:130
The four-legged skeleton of some ancient beast.  This evil undead animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 366.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold
 and poison.  It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 100 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d8 damage, claw to 
 hurt you for 1d8 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d12 damage and crush to hurt 
 you for 1d10 damage.  

The Death watch beetle  (Deep Light Blue 'K')
=== Num:327  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:143  Ac:60  Exp:140
It is a giant beetle that produces a chilling sound.  This undead insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 394.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may 
 wail to terrify you for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and 
 fly over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 160 feet.  It can bite to 
 hurt you for 5d4 damage and wail to terrify you for 5d6 damage.  

The Ogre shaman  (Purple 'O')
=== Num:328  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:145  Ac:55  Exp:140
It is an ogre wrapped in furs and covered in grotesque body paints.  This evil 
 giant shaman is normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 394.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, 
 cure-self, teleport-self, create traps, cause wounds, incur heroism, summon a
 monster, terrify or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, bash down doors
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, weapon, 
 armour, garment, tool, edible item or junk item.  It can hit to batter you for
 3d6 damage, hit to batter you for 3d6 damage and hit to batter you for 3d6 
 damage.  

The Chaos beastman  (Light Purple 'H')
=== Num:1358  Lev:21  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:50  Exp:140
A truly loathsome thing, twisted by chaos, it is a mixture of several different
 kinds of creature.  This evil mix of man, animal and insect is normally found 
 on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 394.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 may create an arrow to hurt you for 3d5 damage; 1 time in 8 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce chaos balls, produce fire bolts, 
 teleport-self or confuse; 1 time in 8.  It can open doors, bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire and poison.  
 It resists chaos.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one
 or two missile weapons, garments, adornments, edible items, junk items or 
 treasures.  It can hit to confuse you for 3d5 damage and hit to drain 
 experience (by 20d6+) from you for 3d5 damage.  

[U] Lugdush, the Uruk  (Blue 'o')
=== Num:248  Lev:21  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:525  Ac:90  Exp:790
A large and powerful orc, captain of one of Saruman's orcish regiments.  This
 evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 21 and moves at normal speed.  
 Killing this creature is worth 2226.36 points for a 1st level character.  He
 is dangerous at his native depth.  He can open doors, bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  He is immune to poison.  He
 resists darkness.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice from
 200 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry one or two good 
 weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items
 .  He can hit to hurt you for 3d7 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d7 damage, hit 
 to hurt you for 3d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

The Smoke hound  (Deep Light Blue 'Z')
=== Num:1252  Lev:22  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:78  Ac:30  Exp:84
A dark and furious shifting cloud that gathers for a moment in the shape of a
 hound.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 244.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It may breathe fire or darkness; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is
 immune to fire.  It resists darkness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be confused
 , charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice
 from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to blast you with
 powerful darkness for 2d8 damage and bite to burn you for 2d8 damage.  

The Pseudo-dragon  (Orange 'd')
=== Num:144  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:188  Ac:30  Exp:130
A small relative of the dragon that inhabits dark caves.  This dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 378.18 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 light or darkness powerfully; 1 time in 9 and is also magical, casting spells
 which terrify or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time
 in 9.  It can bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  
 It resists lite and darkness.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry an adornment or treasure.  It can claw to 
 hurt you for 1d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d3 damage and bite to hurt you 
 for 1d5 damage.  

The Werewol|f|f|ves|  (Deep Light Blue 'C')
=== Num:245  Lev:22  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:217  Ac:30  Exp:130
It is a huge wolf with eyes that glow with mannish intelligence.  This evil 
 animal is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves a bit erratically and
 quickly, but is larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 378.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce fire bolts, blink-self, cause wounds or paralyze;
 1 time in 9.  It can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength, pick up objects and track you unerringly over land, but not through
 water.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  
 It usually appears with a friend.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d8 damage and 
 bite to wound you for 1d16 damage.  

The Cave troll  (Blue Slate 'T')
=== Num:334  Lev:22  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:141  Ac:50  Exp:130
She is a vicious monster, feared for his ferocity. She can lash you with a
 chain hanging around her neck.  This evil troll is normally found on dungeon
 level 22 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 378.18
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 may lash to batter you for 4d8 damage; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors, bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not
 through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She tends to overlook intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may
 carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can 
 hit to batter you for 2d8 damage, hit to batter you for 2d8 damage, bite to 
 hurt you for 1d13 damage and lash to batter you for 4d8 damage.  

The Giant driver ant  (Light Blue 'a')
=== Num:687  Lev:22  Rar:13  Spd:+10  Hp:46  Ac:40  Exp:130
An armoured form moving with purpose.  Powerful on its own, flee when hordes of
 them march.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 378.18 points for a
 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It can bash
 down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Ochre jell|y|y|ies|  (Light Umber 'j')
=== Num:179  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:56  Ac:18  Exp:140
A fast moving highly acidic jelly thing, that is eating away the floor it rests
 on.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves quickly, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 407.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 may spray to dissolve you; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength, pick up objects, leave a trail behind it and 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness
 .  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can touch to dissolve you 
 for 2d10 damage and spray to dissolve you.  

The Scaly horror  (Light Green 'H')
=== Num:888  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:205  Ac:75  Exp:140
A ghastly hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly those with
 scales and fins.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 407.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d8 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d6 damage
 , sting to hurt you for 1d6 damage and crush to hurt you for 2d4 damage.  

The Orc chieftain||ess|s|  (Light Pink 'o')
=== Num:996  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:142  Ac:72  Exp:140
A heavily armoured orc with the mantle of leadership.  This evil orc warrior is
 normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves at normal speed, but is older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 407.27
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She is magical, casting spells intelligently which summon orcs; 1 time in 5.  
 She can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through
 water.  She resists darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry
 one or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items, 
 junk items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d6 
 damage.  

The Drowned dead  (Blue 'z')
=== Num:1249  Lev:22  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:94  Ac:34  Exp:140
It is a bloated human form decomposing and leaking foul water.  This evil
 undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves at normal speed
 , but is larger, faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 407.27 points for a 1st level character.
It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may spit to poison you for 3d6 damage;
 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and swim under water.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire and poison.  
 It resists water.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually
 appears with a friend.  It may carry a weapon, armour, adornment or magical
 device.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage
 , vomit to blast you with water for 4d6 damage and spit to poison you for 3d6 
 damage.  

The Wood elf ranger  (Light Green 'l')
=== Num:1274  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:83  Ac:40  Exp:140
An elven master of both bow and sword, with minor spellcasting skills, and
 spiders come to do her bidding.  This elf warrior mage is normally found on
 dungeon level 22 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 407.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may create an arrow 
 to hurt you for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 1 and is also magical, casting spells
 which produce lightning bolts, produce frost bolts, cure-self, blink-self or 
 summon spiders; 1 time in 4.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, 
 bash down doors and pick up objects.  She needs lite to see you.  She resists 
 lite.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, written items, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 5d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d4 damage.  

The Umber hulk  (Light Umber 'X')
=== Num:205  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:99  Ac:50  Exp:150
This bizarre creature has glaring eyes and large mandibles capable of slicing
 through rock.  This evil animal is normally found on dungeon level 22 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 436.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to confuse you
 ; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors, bore through walls and can eat bodies
 to regain strength.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 is immune to poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can gaze to 
 confuse you, bite to wound you for 1d9 damage and bite to wound you for 1d9 
 damage.  

The Magma spirit  (Orange 'E')
=== Num:804  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:65  Ac:40  Exp:150
A whirlwind of sentient magma.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 22 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or faster
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 436.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, 
 fire and poison.  It resists lava and blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 150 feet.  It can hit to burn you for 2d6 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 3d5 damage and hit to burn you for 2d6 damage.  

The Mountain ogre  (Violet 'O')
=== Num:1011  Lev:22  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:170  Ac:18  Exp:150
A massive grey ogre garbed in black and wielding an enormous mallet.  This evil
 mix of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 436.36 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash down doors, 
 climb on walls and ceilings and track you over land, but not through water.  
 It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, armour, garment, 
 tool, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 2d18 
 damage and hit to batter you for 2d18 damage.  

The Imperial cobra  (Green 'J')
=== Num:1173  Lev:22  Rar:2  Spd:+10  Hp:65  Ac:40  Exp:150
Twelve feet long and emerald green, famed for sudden ambush and sudden death.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves a bit erratically
 and quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 436.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which teleport-self to; 1
 time in 10.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It
 is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It can bite to hurt
 and poison you for 6d9 damage.  

The Giant ochre jellyfish  (Light Umber 'j')
=== Num:1263  Lev:22  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:56  Ac:18  Exp:150
It is a fast moving highly acidic giant jellyfish.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 22 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 436.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It may spit to dissolve you for 2d10 damage; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, pick up objects and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must swim and cannot move out of water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists blindness
 .  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can touch to dissolve you for 2d10 damage and spit to dissolve you for 2d10 
 damage.  

The Devil-bat  (Light Purple 'b')
=== Num:1342  Lev:22  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:47  Ac:80  Exp:150
Devil-bats are notoriously difficult to kill.  This evil mix of animal and 
 demon is normally found on dungeon level 22 and moves a bit erratically and
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is
 worth 436.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can easily evade blows and missiles.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It regenerates quickly.  It is immune to acid, 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects
 of rods, staffs and wands.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can claw to hurt you 
 for 1d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage and bite to hurt and poison 
 you for 1d8 damage.  

The Chimaera  (Red 'H')
=== Num:242  Lev:23  Rar:2  Spd:+5  Hp:156  Ac:15  Exp:150
It is a strange concoction of goat, lion and dragon, with the heads of all
 three beasts.  This mix of animal and dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 23 and moves quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 450.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time in 6.  It can 
 bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry
 one or two treasures.  It can trample to batter you for 2d6 damage, bite to 
 wound you for 2d8 damage and bite to burn you for 2d4 damage.  

The Whirling hatchet  (Light Dark '/')
=== Num:1169  Lev:23  Rar:2  Spd:+20  Hp:29  Ac:32  Exp:150
A small war-axe filled with vitality and malevolence.  It whirs about your
 head, gashing you faster than you can react.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 23 and moves very quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 450.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which blink-self, teleport-self to or cause wounds; 1 time in 9.  It
 can fly over obstacles, communicate telepathically with its own kind and 
 easily evade blows and missiles.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists water, nether, nexus, 
 blindness and chaos.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 140
 feet.  It can hit to wound you for 2d5 damage.  

The Kobold  (Mud 'E')
=== Num:1241  Lev:23  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:81  Ac:12  Exp:150
A malicious spirit of the deep mines, set in stone and casting spells
 ponderously.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 23 and moves at
 normal speed, but is faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 450.00 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 produce acid bolts, recover mana, blink-self, blind or slow; 1 time in 4.  It
 can open doors and bash down doors.  It is immune to acid and edged weapons.  
 It resists blunt weapons.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 180 feet.  It may carry one or two junk items or treasures.  It
 can hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage.  

The Young black dragon  (Light Dark 'd')
=== Num:372  Lev:23  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:160
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a darkest
 black hue.  Acid drips from its body.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 23 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 480.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may breathe acid powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also magical,
 casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments
 or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for
 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Young red dragon  (Red 'd')
=== Num:387  Lev:23  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:160
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a deepest
 red hue.  Heat radiates from its form.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 23 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 480.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also magical,
 casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments
 or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for
 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Clear horror  (White 'H')
=== Num:889  Lev:23  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:234  Ac:55  Exp:160
You can't quite see what hybrid of creatures make up this horrific thing and
 you don't think you want to.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 23
 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 480.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies
 to regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is invisible.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d8 damage, bite to hurt 
 you for 1d6 damage, sting to hurt you for 1d6 damage and crush to hurt you for
 2d4 damage.  

[U] Ulwarth, Son of Ulfang  (Magenta-Pink 't')
=== Num:284  Lev:23  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:782  Ac:40  Exp:910
A short and swarthy Easterling.  This evil man is normally found on dungeon
 level 23 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 2730.00
 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He
 can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  
 He needs lite to see you.  He takes quite a while to see intruders, which he
 may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry a good weapon, garment, tool, lite, 
 adornment, musical item, potion or edible item.  He can hit to wound you for
 4d6 damage, hit to wound you for 4d6 damage and hit to wound you for 4d6 
 damage.  

The Clear slime  (White ',')
=== Num:663  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:6
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 24 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 18.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can touch to hurt you for 1d4 damage and touch to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  
 

The Crystal ooze  (Light Pink 'j')
=== Num:930  Lev:24  Rar:7  Spd:+5  Hp:51  Ac:30  Exp:120
It's cystalline and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 24 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 370.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It may create a spike to 
 wound you for 4d4 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 5.  It can open
 doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, pick up objects, ooze through tiny
 cracks and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is invisible.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is immune to cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is very observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 100 feet.  It may carry an adornment, potion, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can touch to wound you for 4d4 damage.  

The Sasquatch|||es|  (Green 'Y')
=== Num:244  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:184  Ac:40  Exp:160
A tall shaggy, furry humanoid, it could call the yeti brother.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves quickly, but is larger or older
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 494.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to cold.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 1d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 1d10 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Spectator  (Deep Light Blue 'e')
=== Num:589  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:195  Ac:1  Exp:160
A lesser relative of the beholder:  a globular body with a large toothy mouth,
 a large central eye, and four smaller eyes on stalks protruding from the top of
 its body.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves at
 normal speed, but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 494.55 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to paralyze you for 1d4 
 damage or gaze to confuse you for 1d4 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells which cause wounds, probe your weaknesses, cause amnesia, slow
 or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind
 .  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 300 feet.  It can gaze to paralyze you for 1d4 damage, gaze
to confuse you for 1d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d8 damage.  

The Young grey dragon  (Slate 'd')
=== Num:1122  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:160
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a light to
 deep grey hue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 24 and
 moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 494.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid or frost powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells
 which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It
 can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to acid and cold.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3
adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Young yellow dragon  (Yellow 'd')
=== Num:1127  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:160
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a dirty
 yellow hue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves
 at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 494.55 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe fire
 or poison powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to fire and poison.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments or 
 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Young cyan dragon  (Teal 'd')
=== Num:1131  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:160
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a mix of
 green and blue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 24 and
 moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 494.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning or poison powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting
 spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in
 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but
 not through water.  It is immune to lightning and poison.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 
 adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt
you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Young purple dragon  (Purple 'd')
=== Num:1135  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:160
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a lilac
 hue.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves at
 normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 494.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe lightning
 or fire powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to lightning and fire.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments or 
 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Hill giant  (Light Umber 'P')
=== Num:184  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:219  Ac:45  Exp:170
A ten foot tall humanoid with powerful muscles.  This evil giant is normally
 found on dungeon level 24 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 525.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time
 in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  It
 needs lite to see you.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible item or 
 treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 4d8 damage and hit to batter you for
 4d8 damage.  

The Ninja  (Yellow 't')
=== Num:331  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:74  Ac:60  Exp:170
A humanoid clothed in black who moves with blinding speed.  This evil woman
 thief is normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves quickly, but is older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 525.45
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She may create a spike to hurt and poison you; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors
 , bash down doors and hide in unusual places.  She cannot be confused, charmed
 or slept.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, 
 musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can punch to hurt and
 poison you for 3d4 damage, punch to reduce strength and size from you for 3d4 
 damage and kick to batter you for 3d4 damage.  

The Prayer book mimic  (Blue '?')
=== Num:1300  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:566  Ac:40  Exp:170
A strange creature that disguises itself as a prayer book to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its thumping pronouncements.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase
 intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 525.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to curse you 
 for 4d4 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 holy orbs, heal-self, cure-self or summon an undead; 1 time in 5.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It can bite to 
 batter you for 4d4 damage, bite to batter you for 4d4 damage, trample to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 4d4 damage and spit to curse you for
 4d4 damage.  

The Ghoul  (Magenta-Pink 'z')
=== Num:599  Lev:24  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:78  Ac:30  Exp:180
A grave-robbing undead with a withering touch.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 556.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It can open doors, bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, charmed or 
 slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  
 It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a weapon, armour, adornment, 
 magical device or treasure.  It can hit to hurt and poison you for 3d9 damage, 
 touch to paralyze you for 1d4 damage and touch to reduce constitution from you
for 1d4 damage.  

The Space bat  (White 'b')
=== Num:733  Lev:24  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:129  Ac:25  Exp:180
It is a huge ugly bat that strikes terror into your heart.  This evil animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves somewhat erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 556.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It can open doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over
 obstacles.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 70 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d10 damage.  

The Young silver dragon  (Light Slate 'd')
=== Num:764  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:220  Ac:60  Exp:180
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a  liquid
 silver hue.  The air recoils from it fearfully.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 24 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 556.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe frost or fear powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is
 also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to cold.  It cannot be frightened.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 adornments or precious metals.
It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Ooze spirit  (Light Teal 'E')
=== Num:806  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:28  Ac:55  Exp:180
A whirling form of sentient ooze.  This evil creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 24 and moves a bit erratically and very quickly, but is larger
 or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 556.36
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 can ooze through tiny cracks and dig through earth and rubble.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 100 feet.  It can touch to dissolve you for 1d6 damage and touch to dissolve 
 you for 1d6 damage.  

The Creeping sapphire gems  (Blue '$')
=== Num:1113  Lev:24  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:126  Ac:50  Exp:180
It appears to be a pile of sapphires, slithering toward you on lots of tiny
 legs.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 24 and moves quickly.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 556.36 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning
 and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may
 carry up to 4 gem stones.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d4 damage
 and touch to poison you for 3d5 damage.  

The Giant bright blue jellyfish  (Light Blue 'j')
=== Num:1268  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:184  Ac:1  Exp:51
It is smarter than your average giant jellyfish.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 162.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which blink-self, drain mana or 
 summon similar monsters; 1 time in 9.  It can communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It must swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can touch to freeze you for 2d6 damage.  

The Bat of Gorgoroth  (Light Green 'b')
=== Num:605  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:104  Ac:30  Exp:65
Fed with horrid meats and grown to enormous size, this slavering creature seeks
 livelier prey.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves a
 bit erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 206.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe poison or darkness; 1 time in 6
 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify; 1 time in 6.  It can bash
 down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune
 to poison.  It resists darkness.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry
 a garment, junk item or treasure.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 1d10 
 damage and claw to hurt you for 1d4 damage.  

The Blade naga  (Blue Slate 'n')
=== Num:44  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:152  Ac:40  Exp:180
A wild-eyed woman, fair and terrible, rising from the trunk of a great
 iron-hued serpent.  Deadly are the blades she wields.  This evil creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 572.73 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is dangerous at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which 
 terrify; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects
 .  She tends to overlook intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears with a friend.  She may carry up to 3 special objects or 
 treasures.  She can hit to wound you for 3d10 damage, hit to wound you for
 3d10 damage and hit to batter you for 3d8 damage.  

The Killer slicer beetle  (Blue Slate 'K')
=== Num:325  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:198  Ac:60  Exp:180
It is a beetle with deadly sharp cutting mandibles and a rock-hard carapace.  
 This insect is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 572.73
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by
 telepathy.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 140 feet.  It can bite to wound you for 4d9 damage and bite to wound you for
 4d9 damage.  

The Werebear  (Deep Light Blue 'Q')
=== Num:565  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:293  Ac:50  Exp:180
In the eyes of this bear, there glimmers the faintest light of intelligence. 
 And then its form begins to change... The combination of animal cunning, human
 intelligence and the great physical strength of the bear makes for a dangerous
 enemy.  This evil animal is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 572.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash
 down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It takes a while
 to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two 
 chests, garments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d10 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 1d10 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage and crush to hurt
you for 2d6 damage.  

The Young copper dragon  (Umber 'd')
=== Num:763  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:220  Ac:60  Exp:180
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a  shiny
 copper hue.  The air twists around it strangely.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 572.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe lightning or nexus powerfully; 1 time in 10 and
 is also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning.  It
 resists nexus.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 4 adornments or precious metals.  It can claw to 
 hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you 
 for 2d8 damage.  

The Sea drake  (Teal 'D')
=== Num:775  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:180
It is a sinous serpent-like dragon with flippers instead of legs.  Acidic and
 poisonous fumes spill from its mouth.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 572.73 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid or poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, swim under water and track you over land,
 but not through water.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists water.  
 It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, 
 armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 2d4 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for 3d6 damage.  

The War drake  (Light Umber 'D')
=== Num:776  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:180
It is a bat-winged dragon saddled and ready to fight.  Sparks and acidic fumes
 shoot from its mouth.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 25
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 572.73 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe acid or lightning
 powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It
 can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to acid and lightning.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite 
 to electrify you for 3d6 damage.  

The Bloodthirsty soul  (Red 'G')
=== Num:851  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:44  Ac:10  Exp:180
It drains your blood from you.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 25 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 572.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self or drain mana; 1 time in 8.  It can pass through walls, pick up
 objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry one
 or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can bite 
 to wound you for 5d2 damage and bite to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you.  
 

The Ogre leader  (Light Pink 'O')
=== Num:1015  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:173  Ac:69  Exp:180
A massive, heavily armoured figure with the mantle of leadership.  This evil
 mix of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 572.73 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 challenging at her native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  She takes a while to see
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with
 escorts.  She may carry one or two chests, weapons, armours, garments, tools, 
 edible items, junk items or treasures.  She can hit to batter you for 2d12 
 damage, hit to batter you for 2d12 damage, hit to batter you for 2d12 damage
 and hit to batter you for 2d12 damage.  

The Forge giant  (Light Yellow 'P')
=== Num:1197  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:241  Ac:25  Exp:180
Teams of hammer-wielding giants forge the thunderbolts of the gods; when not
 watched, they use them as deadly weapons.  This evil giant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 572.73
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may create a hammer to electrify you for 6d9 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce lightening beams; 1 time
 in 9.  It can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is immune
 to lightning.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It may carry one or two chests, 
 musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  It can hit to batter you 
 for 6d9 damage.  

The Wood elf tracker  (Slate 'l')
=== Num:1276  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:111  Ac:40  Exp:180
A grey-garbed elven warrior who moves with confidence.  This elf warrior is
 normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves quickly, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 572.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She may 
 create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 12d7 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can 
 carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and 
 track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  She needs lite to see
 you.  She resists lite.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, 
 garments, lites, adornments, written items, musical items, potions, edible
 items or treasures.  She can hit to wound you for 8d5 damage and hit to wound 
 you for 8d5 damage.  

The Mind flayer  (Purple 'X')
=== Num:306  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:247  Ac:60  Exp:190
A humanoid form with a gruesome head, tentacular mouth, and piercing eyes. 
 Claws reach out for you and you feel a presence invade your mind.  This evil
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 604.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may gaze to reduce intelligence from you for 2d6 
 damage or gaze to reduce wisdom from you for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 2 and is
 also magical, casting spells which recover mana, cause mind blasting, animate
 monsters from objects, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 2.
It can open doors, bash down doors and communicate telepathically with its own
 kind.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments
 .  It can gaze to reduce intelligence from you for 2d6 damage and gaze to 
 reduce wisdom from you for 2d6 damage.  

The Erinyes||||  (Umber 'U')
=== Num:418  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:216  Ac:50  Exp:190
It is a lesser demon of female form; however, she takes little time to show her
 true colours.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves
 at normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 604.55 points for a 1st level character.
She is challenging at her native depth.  She may lash to hurt you for 3d4 
 damage; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire
 bolts, summon a demon, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors, bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  She is immune to fire, cold and poison.  She resists magical spells
 and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  She cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  She pays little attention to intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She may carry a weapon, armour or written item.  She can hit to hurt 
 you for 3d4 damage, lash to hurt you for 3d4 damage and touch to reduce 
 strength and size from you for 1d5 damage.  

The Cackling spirit  (Purple 'G')
=== Num:860  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:20  Exp:190
A ghostly apparition that cackles horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 604.55 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self or create traps; 1 time in 12.  It can pass through walls and 
 fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut
 .  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It
 may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  
 It can touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 1d8 damage.  

The Dwarven |lord|lady|lords|  (Light Purple 'h')
=== Num:884  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:171  Ac:50  Exp:190
A dwarven lady, with a four-foot beard, come to reclaim the halls of her elders.
This dwarf is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves quickly, but is 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 604.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 13d6 damage; 1
 time in 6.  She can open doors and bash down doors.  She resists blindness.  
 She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  
 She may carry one or two weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, 
 lites, written items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for
 3d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

The Cave giant  (Blue Slate 'P')
=== Num:1031  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:225  Ac:47  Exp:190
An eleven foot tall humanoid hunched over in the darkness.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 604.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to batter you for 2d10 damage; 1 time
 in 10.  It can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is hurt by 
 bright light.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  
 It can hit to batter you for 5d8 damage and hit to batter you for 5d8 damage.  
 

The Mummified guard  (Umber 'z')
=== Num:1102  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:154  Ac:50  Exp:190
An ancient human form encased in mouldy wrappings, forever guarding treasures
 long lost.  This evil undead warrior is normally found on dungeon level 25 and
 moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 604.55 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold
 and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two
weapons, armours, adornments, magical devices or treasures.  It can hit to 
 infect you with disease for 2d6 damage, hit to infect you with disease for 2d6 
 damage and touch to poison you for 2d4 damage.  

The Lamia  (Slate 'u')
=== Num:1203  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:133  Ac:15  Exp:190
A demonic woman-headed serpent, hungering for mortal flesh and souls.  This
 evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed, but
 is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 604.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging
 at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 invoke darkness storms, teleport-self to or curse you; 1 time in 5.  She can 
 open doors and bash down doors.  She is immune to cold and poison.  She
 resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  She cannot
 be frightened.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She may carry a weapon, armour, written item or treasure.  She
 can bite to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 1d9 damage, crush to hurt
you for 3d6 damage, touch to reduce constitution from you and touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you.  

The Giant bright green jellyfish  (Light Green 'j')
=== Num:1269  Lev:25  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:207  Ac:1  Exp:190
It is smarter than your average giant jellyfish.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 25 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 604.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.
It is magical, casting spells which teleport-self, drain mana or summon a
 monster; 1 time in 9.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It must swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 dissolve you for 2d5 damage.  

The Catoblepas|||es|  (Green 'Q')
=== Num:312  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:147  Ac:55  Exp:200
A strange ox-like form with a huge head but a thin, weak neck, it looks likes
 the creation of some deranged alchemist.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 636.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to petrify you
for 2d4 damage or gaze to blind you for 2d4 damage, doubled against eye monsters
 ; 1 time in 9.  It can bash down doors and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to poison.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.
It can gaze to petrify you for 2d4 damage, gaze to blind you for 2d4 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters, trample to hurt you for 2d6 damage and bite to 
 hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Ghastly soul  (Light Green 'G')
=== Num:854  Lev:25  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:49  Ac:10  Exp:200
It is ugly to behold.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 25 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 636.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which teleport-self, drain
 mana, summon a monster or terrify; 1 time in 5.  It can pass through walls, 
 pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut
 .  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d4 damage and 
 touch to infect you with disease for 2d4 damage.  

[U] Ugluk, Half-Orc Captain of the White Hand  (Light Umber 'o')
=== Num:249  Lev:25  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:584  Ac:95  Exp:860
A strong and cunning orc warrior, the commander of Saruman's orcish horde.  
 This evil mix of man and orc is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves
 at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 2736.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He can carry a lite to
 see you, open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through
 water.  He needs lite to see you.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He
 resists darkness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while
 to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with
 escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 3d8 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage and hit
to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress
 further.  

[U] Mauhur, Half-Orc Captain of the White Hand  (Light Umber 'o')
=== Num:633  Lev:25  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:584  Ac:95  Exp:860
A strong and cunning orc warrior, a commander of Saruman's orcish horde.  This
 evil mix of man and orc is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at
 normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 2736.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He can carry a lite to see
 you, open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water
 .  He needs lite to see you.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He
 resists darkness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while
 to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with
 escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 3d8 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage and hit
to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

[U] Grishnakh, the Half Orc Captain of Barad-dur  (Umber 'o')
=== Num:634  Lev:25  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:584  Ac:95  Exp:860
A strong and cunning orc warrior, a commander of Sauron's orcish horde.  This
 evil orc warrior is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal
 speed.  Killing this creature is worth 2736.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He can open doors, bash down
 doors and track you over land, but not through water.  He is immune to fire, 
 cold and poison.  He resists darkness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  
 He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, 
 missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 3d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage.  

[U] Lurtz, Uruk Captain of the White Hand  (Light Blue 'o')
=== Num:644  Lev:25  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:584  Ac:95  Exp:860
A strong and cunning orc warrior, a commander of Saruman's orcish horde.  This
 evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed.  
 Killing this creature is worth 2736.36 points for a 1st level character.  He
 is dangerous at his native depth.  He may create an arrow to hurt you for 10d5 
 damage; 1 time in 9.  He can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  He is immune to fire, cold and 
 poison.  He resists darkness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He
 takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually
 appears with escorts.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, 
 armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you 
 for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 6d5 
 damage.  

[U] Gilim, the Giant of Eruman  (Umber 'P')
=== Num:640  Lev:25  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:850  Ac:35  Exp:1200
A fifty foot tall humanoid that shakes the very ground you stand on.  He looks
 down on your pathetic figure with hate and disdain.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 25 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this
 creature is worth 3818.18 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous
 at his native depth.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down
 doors and pick up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He is immune to acid, 
 cold and poison.  He tends to overlook intruders, which he may notice from 200
 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry a good chest, musical
 item, potion or edible item.  He can hit to batter you for 5d5 damage, bite to
hurt you for 2d10 damage and hit to steal gold from you for 2d2 damage.  

The Giant clear jellyfish  (White 'j')
=== Num:1265  Lev:26  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:108  Ac:1  Exp:12
It is a giant almost transparent jellyfish glowing with pulsing lights.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves at normal speed.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 39.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 threatening at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain
 mana; 1 time in 11.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must swim and cannot move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 invisible.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can touch to poison you for 1d4 damage.  

The Wizard eye  (Light Blue 'e')
=== Num:797  Lev:26  Rar:1  Spd:+0  Hp:134  Ac:6  Exp:45
A disembodied and nearly invisible eye, crackling with magical energy.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger or older deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 147.27 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is threatening at its native depth.  It may gaze to reduce intelligence from
you for 9d6 damage; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce acid bolts, produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts
 , blink-self, create darkness, drain mana, cause wounds, blind or confuse; 1
 time in 3.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly
 and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is invisible.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It cannot be frightened.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It can gaze to 
 reduce intelligence from you for 9d6 damage.  

The 3-headed hydra  (Orange 'y')
=== Num:237  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:261  Ac:65  Exp:190
A strange reptilian hybrid with three heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 26 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 621.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It resists 
 blindness.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 5 treasures.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage
 , bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Forgotten||||  (Orange 'M')
=== Num:289  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:151  Ac:45  Exp:190
One of the Maia who never took up the original song and wanders, lonely and
 unknowing. He is disturbed by the harsh strains of reality around him and seeks
 to return it to its primal discordance.  This mix of elf and demon is normally
 found on dungeon level 26 and moves at normal speed.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 621.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may gaze to terrify you for 1d4 damage; 1 time in 4
 and is also magical, casting spells which cause amnesia, terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is immune to lightning
 and poison.  It resists magical spells, the effects of rods, staffs and wands
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 weapons, armours or written items.  It can gaze to terrify you for 1d4 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d9 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d9 damage.  

The Ogre captain  (Magenta-Pink 'O')
=== Num:1016  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:168  Ac:82  Exp:190
A massive, heavily armoured figure who dominates her kind.  This evil mix of 
 orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 621.82 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging
 at her native depth.  She may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 6d7 
 damage; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors, bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry
 one or two chests, weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible
 items, junk items or treasures.  She can hit to batter you for 3d12 damage, 
 hit to batter you for 3d12 damage and hit to batter you for 3d12 damage.  

The Young brass dragon  (Orange 'd')
=== Num:765  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:220  Ac:60  Exp:200
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a 
 gleaming brass hue.  The air feels drained of magic.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 654.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may breathe acid or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time
 in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 acid.  It resists disenchantment.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 adornments or precious metals.
It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Mummified noble  (Violet 'z')
=== Num:1105  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:51  Ac:75  Exp:200
A well-perserved undead creature, decorated with lavish jewelry.  This evil
 undead warrior is normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 654.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which curse you or 
 cause wounds; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears with
 escorts.  It may carry up to 3 weapons, armours, adornments, magical devices
 or treasures.  It can hit to infect you with disease for 3d8 damage, hit to 
 infect you with disease for 3d8 damage and touch to poison you for 4d5 damage.


The Skeleton serpent  (Mustard 'J')
=== Num:1139  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:48  Ac:25  Exp:200
The skeleton of a great snake, driven back to life by necromantic magics.  Its
 bite is cold and deadly.  This evil undead animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 26 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 654.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to drain experience (by 10d6+)
 from you for 1d1 damage; 1 time in 11.  It can bash down doors and can eat
 bodies to regain strength.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists blindness
 and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, charmed, slept or cut.  
 It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It can bite to freeze you for 4d5 damage and spit to drain experience (by
 10d6+) from you for 1d1 damage.  

The Magic book mimic  (Red '?')
=== Num:1297  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:566  Ac:40  Exp:200
A strange creature that disguises itself as a magic book to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its razor sharp pages.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 26 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 654.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may spit to drain mana from you for 4d4 
 damage, plus spell points; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 which produce lightening beams, produce cone of force, recover mana, 
 blink-self or summon monsters of the same group; 1 time in 5.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It can bite to 
 wound you for 4d4 damage, bite to wound you for 4d4 damage, trample to drain 
 charges from your wands and staffs for 4d4 damage and spit to drain mana from 
 you for 4d4 damage, plus spell points.  

The Stone golem  (Light Slate 'g')
=== Num:232  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:-10  Hp:108  Ac:75  Exp:210
It is a massive animated statue.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 26 and moves slowly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 687.27 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which slow; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is
 immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It resists blunt
 weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept, slowed or 
 paralyzed.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can hit to batter you for 2d10 damage and hit to batter you for 2d10 
 damage.  

The Wood elf shaman  (Purple 'l')
=== Num:277  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:179  Ac:75  Exp:210
A powerful elf, with mighty nature-controlling enchantments.  This evil elf
 shaman is normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves quickly, but is older
 or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 687.27 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells which recover mana, heal-self, 
 cure-self, create darkness, incur heroism, summon a monster, summon spiders or 
 confuse; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors and bash down doors.  She lights up
 the surroundings.  She is hurt by bright light.  She is immune to poison.  She
 resists lite.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 150 feet.  She may carry one
 or two weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, written items, 
 musical items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d7 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Young bronze dragon  (Light Umber 'd')
=== Num:317  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:243  Ac:50  Exp:210
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a rich
 bronze hue, and its shape glitters with strange colours that confuse you.  
 This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves at normal
 speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 687.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe fire or 
 confusion powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments
 or precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw to hurt you 
 for 2d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Mummified ogre  (Purple 'z')
=== Num:394  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:210
It is a massive figure clothed in wrappings.  You are wary of its massive fists.
This evil undead mix of orc and giant is normally found on dungeon level 26 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 687.27 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can 
 open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a weapon, armour, adornment, magical device
 or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d12 damage and hit to hurt you for
 3d12 damage.  

The Young diamond dragon  (White 'd')
=== Num:767  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:210
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of brilliant  diamond
 cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 26 and moves at
 normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 687.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe frost or 
 mana powerfully; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It resists magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 6 adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Haunt  (Slate 'G')
=== Num:838  Lev:26  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:35  Ac:24  Exp:210
It is a haunting, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 26 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 687.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which blind, confuse or paralyze;
 1 time in 12.  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt
 weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 160 feet.  It may carry one
 or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can touch 
 to reduce intelligence from you for 1d6 damage and touch to reduce wisdom from
you for 1d6 damage.  

The Pink Parasite  (Magenta-Pink 'I')
=== Num:1271  Lev:26  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:87  Ac:68  Exp:210
A spined and ferocious insect: its proboscis tastes the air and its head
 unerringly turns to you; leaping off walls and ceilings, it runs at you to
 implant its children in your still warm flesh.  This insect is normally found 
 on dungeon level 26 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 687.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may create a spike to hurt you for 7d6 
 damage or release spores to reduce strength and size from you for 5d6 damage;
 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which give
 invisibility, teleport-self to or incur beserk rage; 1 time in 4.  It can bash
 down doors, climb on walls and ceilings and swim under water.  It is immune to 
 acid and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It prefers to
 ignore intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 3d6 damage, sting to hurt you for 3d6 
 damage and release spores to reduce strength and size from you for 5d6 damage.


[U] Tom Bombadil  (Magenta-Pink 'u')
=== Num:307  Lev:26  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:468  Ac:50  Exp:960
He wears a blue coat, his eyes are blue, and his face is as a ripe as a red
 apple, but creased in laughter.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 26 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  Killing this creature is
 worth 3141.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may sing to do you no effect; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport-self, give invisibility
 , teleport-self to, teleport to, teleport away, push through floor or ceiling, 
 terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 4 good weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit to space out you for 3d4 
 damage, hit to space out you for 3d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage
 and sing to do you no effect.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

The Ice troll  (White 'T')
=== Num:309  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:118  Ac:56  Exp:70
She is a white troll with powerfully clawed hands.  This evil troll is normally
 found on dungeon level 27 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 235.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She may throw a boulder at to cover you with ice for 12d6 
 damage; 1 time in 12.  She can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  She is hurt
 by bright light.  She is immune to cold.  She tends to overlook intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.  She may
 carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or treasure.  She can 
 claw to hurt you for 1d6 damage, hit to batter you for 3d6 damage and bite to 
 freeze you for 3d6 damage.  

The Giant fire termite  (Red 'a')
=== Num:374  Lev:27  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:181  Ac:49  Exp:210
It looks like an ant, but with shorter legs and bigger fangs. It has a red
 exoskeleton alit with flame.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 27
 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 706.36 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to fire.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 140 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to burn you 
 for 3d12 damage and bite to burn you for 3d12 damage.  

The Grey wraith  (Slate 'W')
=== Num:379  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:171  Ac:50  Exp:210
A tangible but ghostly form, made of grey fog.  The air around it feels deathly
 cold.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 27 and
 moves at normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 706.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which produce frost bolts, incur wraithform, create darkness, cause
 wounds, terrify or paralyze; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors, bash down doors
 and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It
 is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 one or two weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices, potions or 
 treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage and touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you.  

The Wailing spirit  (Deep Light Blue 'G')
=== Num:859  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:22  Ac:20  Exp:210
A ghostly apparition that wails horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 706.36 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It may wail to terrify you; 1 time in 12
 and is also magical, casting spells which teleport-self; 1 time in 12.  It can 
 pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical
 items, junk items or treasures.  It can wail to terrify you and touch to 
 reduce dexterity and agility from you for 1d8 damage.  

The Cursing spirit  (Light Umber 'G')
=== Num:861  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:30  Ac:20  Exp:210
A ghostly apparition that curses horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 706.36 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self, curse you or cause wounds; 1 time in 11.  It can pass through
 walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 140 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items
 or treasures.  It can touch to reduce wisdom from you for 1d9 damage.  

The Death sword  (Light Slate '|')
=== Num:1322  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:34  Ac:40  Exp:210
A bloodthirsty blade lurking for prey. Beware!  This evil creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 27 and moves very quickly, but is faster deeper in the
 dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 706.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison and 
 edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry a special object or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage, 
 hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage and hit to hurt
you for 5d5 damage.  

The Gorgimaera  (Orange 'H')
=== Num:299  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:234  Ac:55  Exp:220
The result of evil experiments, this travesty of nature should never be alive. 
 It has three heads - goat, dragon and gorgon - all attached to a lion's body.  
 This mix of animal and dragon is normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves
 at normal speed, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 740.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to petrify you for 2d6 damage
 and may breathe fire; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to fire.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it
 may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry one or two treasures.  It can trample 
 to batter you for 2d10 damage, bite to burn you for 2d10 damage and gaze to 
 petrify you for 2d6 damage.  

The Young gold dragon  (Yellow 'd')
=== Num:382  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:220
It has a form that legends are made of.  Its still-tender scales are a
 tarnished gold hue, and light is reflected from its form.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 740.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may breathe poison or sound powerfully; 1 time in 10
 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be stunned.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments or precious metals.  It
 can claw to batter you for 2d6 damage, claw to batter you for 2d6 damage and 
 bite to batter you for 2d8 damage.  

The Wyvern  (Deep Light Blue 'd')
=== Num:555  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:176  Ac:66  Exp:220
A fast-moving and deadly draconian animal.  Beware its poisonous sting!  This
 evil mix of animal and dragon is normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves
 quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 740.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 treasures.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage, bite to hurt you 
 for 2d6 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 2d6 damage.  

The Spectral anaconda  (Blue Slate 'J')
=== Num:1200  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:146  Ac:26  Exp:220
An enormous serpent, floating in air and bounding off the dungeon walls.  It
 kills by psychic suffocation, but it is its terrible eyes that the tales dwell
 on in horror.  This evil undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 27
 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 740.00 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to paralyze you, gaze to 
 terrify you or gaze to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you; 1 time in 7 and
 is also magical, casting spells which blink-self or teleport-self to; 1 time
 in 7.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and fly over
 obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to cold and 
 poison.  It is observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 can crush to hurt you for 4d6 damage, gaze to paralyze you, gaze to terrify 
 you and gaze to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you.  

The Skeletal dragon  (Mustard 'd')
=== Num:1285  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:135  Ac:50  Exp:220
It has the form that legends are made of, but no flesh hangs from its polished
 bones.  It raises its wings and launches itself at you.  This evil undead 
 dragon is normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 740.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, dig through earth and rubble and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 3 adornments.  It can 
 claw to batter you for 2d4 damage, claw to batter you for 2d4 damage and bite 
 to wound you for 3d6 damage.  

The Vampire  (Light Slate 'V')
=== Num:298  Lev:27  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:148  Ac:45  Exp:230
It is a humanoid with an aura of power.  You notice a sharp set of front teeth.
This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves at
 normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 773.64 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self to, teleport to, incur wraithform, create darkness, curse you, 
 cause mind blasting, cause wounds, cause amnesia, terrify or paralyze; 1 time
 in 8.  It can open doors, bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is cold
 blooded.  It regenerates quickly.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune
 to cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 3 weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices, written items or 
 treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage, bite to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 1d4 damage and bite 
 to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 1d4 damage.  

[U] Sangahyando of Umbar  (Slate 'q')
=== Num:273  Lev:27  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:672  Ac:80  Exp:1000
A Black Numenorean with a blacker heart.  This evil man is normally found on
 dungeon level 27 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth
 3363.64 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native
 depth.  He is magical, casting spells which curse you, cause amnesia or slow;
 1 time in 4.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  
 He needs lite to see you.  He is immune to lightning and fire.  He cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may
 notice from 250 feet.  He usually appears in groups.  He may carry up to 3
 good weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical devices, written items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 4d6 
 damage.  

[U] Angamaite of Umbar  (Slate 'q')
=== Num:274  Lev:27  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:672  Ac:80  Exp:1000
A Black Numenorean who hates the men of the west.  This evil man is normally
 found on dungeon level 27 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is
 worth 3363.64 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native
 depth.  He is magical, casting spells which curse you, cause amnesia or slow;
 1 time in 4.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  
 He needs lite to see you.  He is immune to lightning and fire.  He cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may
 notice from 250 feet.  He usually appears in groups.  He may carry up to 3
 good weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical devices, written items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 4d6 
 damage.  

[U] the Great Spider of Mirkwood  (Light Teal 'S')
=== Num:637  Lev:27  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:1008  Ac:80  Exp:1800
The fattest and most bloated spider living in Mirkwood.  This evil insect is
 normally found on dungeon level 27 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this
 creature is worth 6054.55 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at
 his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which heal-self
 , create traps, cause wounds, summon similar monsters, terrify, blind, confuse
 or slow; 1 time in 2.  He can bash down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.
He appears in a giant web.  He is hurt by bright light.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He pays little attention to intruders, which he may notice
 from 80 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 5 good 
 garments or junk items.  He can claw to hurt and poison you for 2d5 damage, 
 claw to hurt and poison you for 2d5 damage, bite to paralyze you for 2d10 
 damage and sting to reduce strength and size from you for 1d4 damage.  It is a
 dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Black slime  (Light Dark ',')
=== Num:667  Lev:28  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:30  Ac:1  Exp:46
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 28 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 158.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it
 may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 reduce all stats from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Half-troll  (Light Umber 'T')
=== Num:335  Lev:28  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:169  Ac:50  Exp:120
A huge, ugly, half-human in search of plunder.  This evil mix of woman and 
 troll is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 414.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She may throw a boulder at to hurt you; 1 time
 in 12.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  She
 needs lite to see you.  She is immune to poison.  She tends to overlook
 intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears in groups.
She may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item or junk item.  She can hit 
 to batter you for 2d11 damage, hit to batter you for 2d11 damage and bite to 
 hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Giant purple worm  (Purple 'w')
=== Num:310  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:255  Ac:65  Exp:230
It is a massive worm form, many feet in length.  Its vast maw drips acid and
 poison.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal
 speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 794.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and 
 dig through earth and rubble.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It takes
 quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It can hit
to hurt you for 1d8 damage, bite to dissolve you for 2d8 damage and sting to 
 hurt and poison you for 1d8 damage.  

The Skeleton ogre  (Light Slate 's')
=== Num:320  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:147  Ac:55  Exp:230
It is an ogre skeleton animated by dark dweomers.  This evil undead mix of orc
 and giant is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger, faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 794.55 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold
 and poison.  It resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d10 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to wound you for 1d14 damage.


The Demonologist  (Light Violet 'q')
=== Num:393  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:252  Ac:50  Exp:230
A figure twisted by evil standing in robes of deepest crimson.  This evil woman
 mage is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves quickly, but is older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 794.55
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She is magical, casting spells intelligently which invoke darkness storms, 
 produce fire bolts, recover mana, blink-self, summon a demon or paralyze; 1
 time in 1.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  
 She needs lite to see you.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, magical devices, written items, potions or edible items.  She can 
 hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage and hit to hurt
you for 2d6 damage.  

The Glabrezu  (Light Umber 'U')
=== Num:456  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:644  Ac:40  Exp:230
It is demon with arms and pincers, its form a true mockery of life.  This evil 
 demon is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 794.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, 
 produce cone of hellfire, summon a demon, blind, confuse, slow or paralyze
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can open doors
 and bash down doors.  It is immune to acid, lightning and fire.  It resists 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a weapon, armour
 or written item.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt you 
 for 3d4 damage.  

The Hooked horror  (Purple 'H')
=== Num:890  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:250  Ac:60  Exp:230
A ghastly hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly those with
 hooks and barbs.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 794.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d9 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d7 damage
 , sting to hurt and poison you for 1d7 damage and crush to hurt you for 2d5 
 damage.  

The Plague rat  (Light Green 'r')
=== Num:1209  Lev:28  Rar:8  Spd:+5  Hp:98  Ac:8  Exp:230
A ravenous black rat with tusk-sized incisors, eating and infecting everything
 in its path.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves
 somewhat erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 794.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is over
 powered at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to
 regain strength.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  
 It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can 
 bite to infect you with disease for 2d12 damage.  

The Chest mimic  (Light Umber '&')
=== Num:556  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:849  Ac:40  Exp:240
A strange creature that disguises itself as a chest to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.  The first that most
 adventurers realise of the deception is when the seemingly invitingly open lid
 of the chest suddenly grows teeth and then slams shut on the adventurer's
 hand...  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon and
 does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 829.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 may spit to blind you for 4d4 damage, doubled against eye monsters; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce poison balls, cause wounds, 
 summon a monster, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 5.  It is cold blooded.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  
 It may carry up to 3 special objects or treasures.  It can bite to hurt and
 poison you for 4d4 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage, trample
to confuse you for 4d4 damage and spit to blind you for 4d4 damage, doubled
 against eye monsters.  

The Green giant  (Light Green 'P')
=== Num:1022  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:247  Ac:60  Exp:240
A thirteen foot tall giant with smooth green skin.  This evil giant is normally
 found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 829.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time
 in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  It
 needs lite to see you.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible item or 
 treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 6d8 damage and hit to batter you for
 6d8 damage.  

The |Incubus|Succubus|Demon lovers|  (Light Dark 'U')
=== Num:1066  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:216  Ac:50  Exp:240
He is a handsome half-dressed humanoid with small horns and wings.  This evil 
 demon is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 829.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, 
 blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 7.  
 It can open doors, bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is immune to 
 fire, cold and poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a 
 weapon, armour or written item.  It can hit to reduce strength and size from 
 you for 3d4 damage and touch to paralyze you for 1d5 damage.  

The Creeping ruby gems  (Red '$')
=== Num:1114  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:162  Ac:50  Exp:240
It appears to be a pile of rubies, slithering toward you on lots of tiny legs.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves quickly.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 829.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning and poison.  
 It resists blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may carry up to 6
gem stones.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d5 damage, touch to poison
you for 3d5 damage and hit to batter you for 1d8 damage.  

The Star drake  (Light Yellow 'D')
=== Num:772  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:250
It is a dragon-like form wrapped in starlight.  Glowing blue eyes shine out in 
 the dark, and it is surrounded by the cold of deep space.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 863.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  
 and may breathe lightning or darkness powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which blink-self, create darkness, 
 terrify or blind powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is immune to lightning and 
 cold.  It resists darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It
 may carry up to 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for
 2d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite to blast you with
 powerful darkness for 3d6 damage.  

The Orc |king|queen|monarchs|  (Magenta-Pink 'o')
=== Num:997  Lev:28  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:183  Ac:85  Exp:250
A heavily armoured orc ruler who dominates her kin with his powerful blows.  
 This evil orc warrior is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at
 normal speed, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 863.64 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which summon orcs; 1 time in 5.  She can open doors, bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  She is immune to poison.  She resists 
 darkness.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry one or two weapons, 
 missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items, junk items or 
 treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d6 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage.  

[U] Radagast the Brown  (Umber 'M')
=== Num:1313  Lev:28  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:689  Ac:80  Exp:800
Sometimes belittled as a bird-loving fool, he keeps crying about something
 terrible he's found in Fangorn, but he won't talk.  He believes you to be a spy
 of Saruman's, sent here to confront him.  The only way to convince him
 otherwise is to best him in battle.  This elf mage is normally found on
 dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth
 2763.64 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native
 depth.  He is magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, heal-self, 
 create traps, summon plants or slow; 1 time in 4.  He can open doors and bash
 down doors.  He is immune to fire and cold.  He cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 200
 feet.  He may carry one or two good weapons, armours or written items.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage and hit to 
 drain charges from your wands and staffs.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding
 your progress further.  

[U] Ibun, Son of Mim  (Orange 'h')
=== Num:268  Lev:28  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:689  Ac:80  Exp:1000
One of the last of the Petty-Dwarves.  Ibun is a tricky sorcerous little being,
 full of mischief.  This dwarf is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves
 at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 3454.55 points for a 1st
 level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting
 spells which produce fire bolts, heal-self or slow; 1 time in 6.  He can open
 doors and bash down doors.  He is immune to fire and cold.  He resists 
 blindness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant
 of intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears in
 groups.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, lites, written items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to
hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for
 3d6 damage and hit to disenchant your armour and weapons.  

[U] Khim, Son of Mim  (Orange 'h')
=== Num:269  Lev:28  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:689  Ac:80  Exp:1000
One of the last of the Petty-Dwarves.  Khim is a tricky sorcerous little being,
 full of mischief.  This dwarf is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves
 at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 3454.55 points for a 1st
 level character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting
 spells which produce fire bolts, heal-self or slow; 1 time in 6.  He can open
 doors and bash down doors.  He is immune to fire and cold.  He resists 
 blindness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant
 of intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears in
 groups.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, lites, written items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to
hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for
 3d6 damage and hit to disenchant your armour and weapons.  

[U] Orgof the Elf  (Orange 'l')
=== Num:635  Lev:28  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:689  Ac:80  Exp:1000
An insulting and bitter Elf, his pride often outruns his prowess in arms.  His
 barbed wit and loose tongue have earned him more than his share of enemies.  
 This elf is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed.  
 Killing this creature is worth 3454.55 points for a 1st level character.  He
 is dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells which produce
 fire bolts, heal-self or slow; 1 time in 6.  He can open doors and bash down
 doors.  He is immune to fire and cold.  He cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 200
 feet.  He may carry one or two good weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, written items, musical items, potions or edible items.  He can hit
to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for
 3d6 damage and hit to disenchant your armour and weapons.  

[U] Bolg, Son of Azog  (Violet 'o')
=== Num:235  Lev:28  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:450  Ac:50  Exp:1100
A large and powerful orc.  He is tall and fast, but fortunately blessed with
 orcish brains.  This evil orc is normally found on dungeon level 28 and moves
 quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 3800.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He may create an arrow to 
 hurt you for 6d6 damage; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors, bash down doors, 
 pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  He is immune
 to poison.  He resists darkness.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he
 may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up
 to 3 good weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or 
 junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 6d6 
 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Uldor the Accursed  (Orange 't')
=== Num:304  Lev:28  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:860  Ac:70  Exp:1200
An evil and cunning man from the East.  Having once sworn allegiance to the
 sons of Feanor, it was Uldor's treachery that turned the tide of the Battle of
 Unnumbered Tears in Morgoth's favour.  This evil man is normally found on
 dungeon level 28 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth
 4145.45 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native
 depth.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry one or two good 
 weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions or edible
 items.  He can hit to wound you for 4d6 damage, hit to wound you for 4d6 
 damage, hit to wound you for 4d6 damage and hit to wound you for 4d6 damage.  

The Nexus hound  (Blue Slate 'Z')
=== Num:295  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:129  Ac:30  Exp:74
A locus of conflicting points coalesce to form the vague shape of a huge hound.
 Or is it just your imagination?  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 29 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 262.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe nexus; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It
 resists nexus.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage and claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage.  

The Clear ooze  (White 'j')
=== Num:931  Lev:29  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:34  Ac:30  Exp:84
It's clear and it's oozing.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 29
 and moves somewhat erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 297.82 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can can eat bodies to regain strength
 , pick up objects, ooze through tiny cracks and communicate telepathically
 with its own kind.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is very
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It may carry an 
 adornment, potion, junk item or treasure.  It can touch to confuse you for 1d8 
 damage.  

The Vibration hound  (Yellow 'Z')
=== Num:294  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:129  Ac:30  Exp:85
A blurry canine form which seems to be moving as fast as the eye can follow. 
 You can feel the earth resonating beneath your feet.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 29 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 301.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe sound; 1 time
 in 5.  It can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not
 through water.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can bite to batter you for 8d2 damage, bite to batter you for
 8d2 damage, claw to batter you for 5d1 damage and claw to batter you for 5d1 
 damage.  

The Spirit naga  (Deep Light Blue 'n')
=== Num:301  Lev:29  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:204  Ac:75  Exp:150
A wraithly snake-like form with the torso of a beautiful woman, it is the most
 powerful of its kind.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 29
 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 531.82 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which 
 heal-self, incur wraithform, create darkness, cause mind blasting, summon
 similar monsters or blind; 1 time in 4.  She can open doors, bash down doors
 and swim under water.  She is invisible.  She cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  She pays very little attention to intruders, which she may notice from
 200 feet.  She may carry up to 4 written items or potions.  She can crush to 
 hurt you for 2d17 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d17 damage.  

The Water troll  (Light Teal 'T')
=== Num:348  Lev:29  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:324  Ac:50  Exp:240
She is a troll that reeks of brine.  This evil troll is normally found on
 dungeon level 29 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, older, more powerful
 or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 850.91
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, swim under
 water and track you over land, but not through water.  She is hurt by bright
 light.  She is immune to cold and poison.  She resists water.  She tends to
 overlook intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears
 in groups.  She may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  She can hit to batter you for 2d14 damage, hit to batter you for
 2d14 damage and bite to hurt you for 1d14 damage.  

The Nexus vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Blue Slate 'v')
=== Num:400  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:162  Ac:40  Exp:240
A maelstrom of potent magical energy.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 29 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 850.91
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  
 and may breathe nexus powerfully; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to blunt weapons.  It resists nexus and blindness.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can envelope to blast you 
 with nexus for 5d5 damage.  

The Young emerald dragon  (Green 'd')
=== Num:768  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:240
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of brilliant  emerald
 cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 29 and moves at
 normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 850.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe poison or 
 force powerfully; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 6 adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Zombified giant  (Light Purple 'z')
=== Num:1299  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:255  Ac:60  Exp:240
It is an animated giant corpse.  Flesh falls off in large chunks as it shambles
 forward.  This evil undead giant is normally found on dungeon level 29 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 850.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may 
 throw a boulder at to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time in 7.  It can carry a
 lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  It needs lite to see you.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry one or two weapons, armours, adornments, magical
 devices or treasures.  It can hit to batter you for 6d8 damage and hit to 
 batter you for 6d8 damage.  

The Frost giant  (White 'P')
=== Num:199  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:231  Ac:50  Exp:250
A twelve foot tall giant covered in furs.  This evil giant is normally found on
 dungeon level 29 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 886.36
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 2d10 damage; 1 time in 10.  It can 
 carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  It needs lite to see
 you.  It is immune to cold.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two chests, musical items, potions, 
 edible items or treasures.  It can hit to batter you for 5d8 damage and hit to
freeze you for 5d8 damage.  

The Bodak  (Red 'u')
=== Num:389  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:166  Ac:68  Exp:250
It is a humanoid form composed of flames and hatred.  This evil demon is
 normally found on dungeon level 29 and moves at normal speed, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 886.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may gaze to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you; 1 time in 4
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, produce fire
 bolts or summon a demon; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, bash down doors and 
 pick up objects.  It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists magical
 spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice
 from 100 feet.  It can hit to burn you for 4d6 damage, hit to burn you for 4d6 
 damage and gaze to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you.  

The Mumbling spirit  (Mustard 'G')
=== Num:863  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:39  Ac:20  Exp:250
A ghostly apparition that mumbles horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 29 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 886.36 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 11.  It can pass through
 walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 140 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items
 or treasures.  It can touch to reduce intelligence from you for 1d10 damage.  

The Silent watcher  (Red 'g')
=== Num:597  Lev:29  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:874  Ac:80  Exp:260
A figure carved from stone, with three vulture faces whose eyes glow with a
 malevolent light.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 29
 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does
 not deign to chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth 921.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 may gaze to petrify you, gaze to terrify you, gaze to space out you or shriek 
 to reduce strength and size from you; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells which drain mana, cause mind blasting, probe your weaknesses, summon a
 monster, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to lightning
 , fire, cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.
It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 420 feet.  It can 
 gaze to petrify you, gaze to terrify you, gaze to space out you and shriek to 
 reduce strength and size from you.  

The Hell crawler  (Light Red 'c')
=== Num:747  Lev:29  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:203  Ac:40  Exp:260
A monstrous centipede coated with fire and with flaming tentacles around its
 head.  This evil insect is normally found on dungeon level 29 and moves a bit
 erratically at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 921.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly
 at its native depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors
 , climb on walls and ceilings and dig through earth and rubble.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire and poison.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It can sting to burn you for 3d12 damage, sting to burn you for
 3d12 damage and sting to burn you for 3d12 damage.  

[U] the King of the Wood Elves  (Light Teal 'l')
=== Num:1082  Lev:29  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:378  Ac:80  Exp:1600
A strong and unforgiving wood elf, he holds court in the deepest bowels of
 Mirkwood, and acts without mercy against outsiders.  This elf archer is
 normally found on dungeon level 29 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature
 is worth 5672.73 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native
 depth.  He may create an arrow to hurt you for 20d6 damage; 1 time in 2 and is
 also magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, 
 haste-self, create darkness, summon a monster, summon spiders, blind or 
 confuse; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.
He lights up the surroundings.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He
 resists lite.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while to
 see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with
 escorts.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, written items, musical items, potions or edible items.  He can hit
to hurt you for 3d12 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d12 damage.  It is a
 dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Pink slime  (Magenta-Pink ',')
=== Num:665  Lev:30  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:15  Ac:1  Exp:24
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 30 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 87.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it
 may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 reduce strength and size from you for 1d4 damage and touch to reduce strength
 and size from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Crystal hound  (Light Pink 'Z')
=== Num:1079  Lev:30  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:127  Ac:30  Exp:120
A jagged crystalline shape does not disguise the danger this hound clearly
 presents as it bores through the dungeon towards you.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 436.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe shards; 1
 time in 6.  It can bash down doors, bore through walls, dig through earth and
 rubble and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It resists 
 edged weapons.  It cannot be cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it
 may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to 
 batter you for 1d16 damage and claw to wound you for 4d3 damage.  

[U] the Cave troll at Balin's Tomb  (Blue Slate 'T')
=== Num:1277  Lev:30  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:260  Ac:50  Exp:220
He is a vicious monster, feared for his ferocity. He can lash you with a chain
 hanging around his neck.  This evil troll is normally found on dungeon level 30
 and moves at normal speed.  Killing this creature is worth 800.00 points for a
 1st level character.  He is threatening at his native depth.  He may lash to 
 batter you for 2d8 damage; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells
 which summon orcs; 1 time in 6.  He can open doors, bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  He
 is hurt by bright light.  He tends to overlook intruders, which he may notice
 from 200 feet.  He may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item
 or treasure.  He can hit to batter you for 2d8 damage, hit to batter you for
 2d8 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d13 damage and lash to batter you for 2d8 
 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Black |knight|princess|knights|  (Slate 't')
=== Num:303  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:142  Ac:70  Exp:260
She is a figure fitted in a deep black dress; she looks at you menacingly.  
 This evil woman warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves
 quickly, but is faster, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 945.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which create
 darkness, cause wounds, incur heroism, summon monsters of the same class, 
 terrify or blind; 1 time in 6.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors
 and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  She resists darkness.  She
 is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may
 carry one or two weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, 
 potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to wound you for 5d5 damage, 
 hit to wound you for 5d5 damage and hit to wound you for 5d5 damage.  

The Invisible stalker  (Light Yellow 'E')
=== Num:352  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:112  Ac:46  Exp:260
It is impossible to define its form but its violence is legendary.  This evil
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves somewhat erratically
 and very quickly, but is faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 945.45 points for a 1st level character.
It is challenging at its native depth.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  
 It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage.  

The Wormwood  (Violet ':')
=== Num:676  Lev:30  Rar:5  Spd:-10  Hp:288  Ac:20  Exp:260
It is a disgusting mass of roots and branches.  This evil plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 30 and moves a bit erratically and slowly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 945.45 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which produce poison balls; 1 time in 9.  It can bore
 through walls.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It
 is immune to poison.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 60 feet.  It may carry a special object or treasure.  
 It can crawl to poison you for 2d3 damage and crush to hurt you for 2d10 
 damage.  

The Witch  (Mustard 'p')
=== Num:1212  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:293  Ac:15  Exp:260
A wizened old crone with a malicious twinkle in her eye.  This evil woman is
 normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves quickly, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 945.45 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which cure-self, blink-self, create
 darkness, curse you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds or cause hallucinations
 ; 1 time in 2.  She can open doors and fly over obstacles.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She usually
 appears with a friend.  She may carry a weapon, armour, garment, lite, 
 adornment, written item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to 
 reduce charisma from you for 2d5 damage and hit to drain experience (by 10d6+)
 from you for 2d5 damage.  

The Banshee  (Blue 'G')
=== Num:275  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:26  Ac:24  Exp:270
It is a ghostly woman's form that wails mournfully.  This evil undead creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves somewhat erratically and
 quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 981.82 points for a 1st level character.
She is challenging at her native depth.  She may wail to terrify you; 1 time in
 16 and is also magical, casting spells which teleport-self or drain mana; 1
 time in 16.  She can pass through walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles
 .  She is cold blooded.  She is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  She
 cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  She is fairly observant
 of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one or two 
 garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  She can wail to 
 terrify you and touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you.  

The Black oak  (Light Dark ':')
=== Num:677  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:480  Ac:20  Exp:270
It is a twisted black-barked tree.  This evil undead plant is normally found on
 dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 and does not deign to chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which teleport to, create darkness, 
 drain mana, summon an undead, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It may carry a special object or 
 treasure.  It can touch to paralyze you, touch to paralyze you and crush to 
 hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Thunder drake  (Light Blue 'D')
=== Num:1147  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:320  Ac:100  Exp:270
A blurry dragon-like form which seems to be moving as fast as the eye can
 follow.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe sound powerfully; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It cannot
 be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 5 chests, armours or 
 adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 3d5 damage, claw to hurt you for 3d5 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Young garnet dragon  (Light Red 'd')
=== Num:1231  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:270
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of bright  garnet
 cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at
 normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 981.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe disease
 powerfully; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is cold blooded.  It resists teleportation.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 6 adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Sprite  (Purple 'E')
=== Num:1242  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:65  Ac:12  Exp:270
A viscious spirit of hot flames, burning brightly and casting spells furiously.
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves quickly, but is 
 faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, recover
 mana, blink-self, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and 
 easily evade blows and missiles.  It is immune to fire.  It resists edged and 
 blunt weapons.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 180 feet.  It may carry one or two junk items or treasures.  It can touch to 
 burn you for 2d6 damage.  

The Footpad  (Light Teal 't')
=== Num:263  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:193  Ac:18  Exp:280
A cunning-eyed thief of wiley artifice and shifty speed.  This evil woman thief
 is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves quickly, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1018.18
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She may create a shot to hurt you for 15d5 damage or create a dart to poison 
 you with delayed effect for 20d4 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which teleport-self to, create darkness or create
 traps; 1 time in 4.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down
 doors, pick up objects and hide in unusual places.  She needs lite to see you.
She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 250 feet.  She
 may carry up to 3 weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments
 , musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to steal 
 items from you for 3d8 damage and hit to steal gold from you for 3d8 damage.  

The Shrieking spirit  (White 'G')
=== Num:862  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:35  Ac:20  Exp:280
A ghostly apparition that shrieks horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 1018.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may shriek to do you no
 effect; 1 time in 11 and is also magical, casting spells which teleport-self;
 1 time in 11.  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is
 invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one or two 
 garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can touch to 
 reduce constitution from you for 1d9 damage and shriek to do you no effect.  

The Giant black jellyfish  (Light Dark 'j')
=== Num:1270  Lev:30  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:225  Ac:1  Exp:280
It is a giant jellyfish glowing with pulsing black lights.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1018.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain mana; 1 time in 11.  
 It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It must swim and cannot
 move out of water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 20 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can touch to reduce all stats from you for 2d8 damage.  

The Variag raider  (Orange 't')
=== Num:364  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:146  Ac:70  Exp:290
A human warrior from Khand, moving with lightning speed.  This evil woman
 warrior is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves quickly, but is older
 or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 1054.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native
 depth.  She may create a dart to poison you; 1 time in 5.  She can carry a
 lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She needs
 lite to see you.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry one
 or two weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions, 
 edible items or treasures.  She can punch to hurt and poison you for 6d4 
 damage and punch to reduce strength and size from you for 6d4 damage.  

The Mature white dragon  (White 'D')
=== Num:375  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:344  Ac:70  Exp:290
A large dragon, scales gleaming bright white.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1054.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe frost powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.
It is immune to cold.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 
 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Mature blue dragon  (Blue 'D')
=== Num:384  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:344  Ac:70  Exp:290
A large dragon, scales tinted deep blue.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 1054.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may breathe lightning powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 chests, armours, adornments or 
 treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Mature green dragon  (Green 'D')
=== Num:385  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:344  Ac:70  Exp:290
A large dragon, scales tinted deep green.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1054.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe poison powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Young sapphire dragon  (Blue 'd')
=== Num:769  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:290
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of brilliant 
 sapphire cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 30 and
 moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 1054.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning or gravity powerfully; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting
 spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6
 .  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to lightning.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 6 adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Young ruby dragon  (Red 'd')
=== Num:770  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:290
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of brilliant  ruby
 cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at
 normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 1054.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe fire or 
 inertia powerfully; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 6 adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Unborn soul  (Magenta-Pink 'G')
=== Num:853  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:54  Ac:10  Exp:290
It takes you back a while.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 30 and moves somewhat erratically at normal speed.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 1054.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self, drain mana or cause amnesia; 1 time in 6.  It can pass through
 walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or 
 treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d3 damage and touch to take you back
 in time for 2d4 damage.  

The Sun drake  (Light Yellow 'D')
=== Num:773  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:300
It is a dragon-like form wrapped in the fire of the sun. White hot eyes peer
 from the light, and it is surrounded by the burning heat of the corona.  This
 evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1090.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.   and may breathe plasma or light powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 lights up the surroundings.  It is immune to lightning and fire.  It resists 
 plasma and lite.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to
 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw
to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite to blast you with plasma for 3d6 damage.  

The Ogre priest||ess|s|  (Blue 'O')
=== Num:1017  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:150  Ac:40  Exp:300
A hideous ogre wrapped in dark priestly robes.  This evil mix of orc and giant
 is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 , older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1090.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which haste-self, heal-self, 
 cure-self, teleport-self, cause wounds, incur heroism, terrify or paralyze; 1
 time in 4.  It can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but
 not through water.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two chests, weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, edible items, junk items or treasures.  It can hit to batter 
 you for 3d8 damage, hit to batter you for 3d8 damage, hit to batter you for
 3d8 damage and hit to batter you for 3d8 damage.  

The River giant  (Light Teal 'P')
=== Num:1024  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:278  Ac:70  Exp:300
A nineteen foot tall giant with unstoppable strength.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1090.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to blast you with water for 2d10 
 damage; 1 time in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down
 doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  It needs lite to see you.  It
 resists water.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  
 It can hit to batter you for 7d8 damage and hit to batter you for 7d8 damage.  
 

The Black troll  (Light Dark 'T')
=== Num:1065  Lev:30  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:396  Ac:60  Exp:300
A massive and cruel troll, acidic drool drips down her hideous face.  This evil
troll is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1090.91 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not
 through water.  She is hurt by bright light.  She is immune to acid and poison
 .  She tends to overlook intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 usually appears in groups.  She may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item
 , junk item or treasure.  She can hit to batter you for 2d7 damage, hit to 
 batter you for 2d7 damage, bite to batter you for 2d5 damage and bite to 
 dissolve you for 2d5 damage.  

The Chromatic hound  (Violet 'Z')
=== Num:1125  Lev:30  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:203  Ac:40  Exp:300
Shimmering in rainbow hues, this hound is beautiful and deadly.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1090.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning, fire or poison; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning, fire
 and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, claw to electrify you for 2d8 damage, 
 bite to burn you for 4d4 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage
 .  

The Shantak  (Yellow 'B')
=== Num:1244  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:256  Ac:12  Exp:300
A scaly, flightless bird larger than an elephant, with a horse-like head.   
 This evil animal is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves quickly, but
 is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 1090.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may gaze to reduce intelligence from you; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells which haste-self or terrify; 1 time in 5.  It can bash
 down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It is immune to acid.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 550 feet.  It can 
 bite to hurt you for 3d6 damage and gaze to reduce intelligence from you.  

The Lizard |king|queen|monarchs|  (Green 'R')
=== Num:1360  Lev:30  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:183  Ac:40  Exp:300
A lizardman leader.   This evil mix of woman and animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 30 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1090.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a dagger to 
 petrify you for 5d5 damage or wail to terrify you; 1 time in 5.  She can carry
 a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, swim under water and track you
 over land, but not through water.  She needs lite to see you.  She is immune
 to acid and poison.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice
 from 200 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry up to 3 
 garments, junk items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage, 
 hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage and wail to terrify you.  

The Fire giant  (Red 'P')
=== Num:209  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:255  Ac:60  Exp:310
A glowing fourteen foot tall giant.  Flames drip from its red skin.  This evil 
 giant is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 1127.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to burn you for 2d10 damage; 1
 time in 7.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  
 It needs lite to see you.  It is immune to fire.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two chests, 
 musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  It can hit to batter you 
 for 6d8 damage and hit to burn you for 6d8 damage.  

The Wild mumak  (Slate 'Q')
=== Num:373  Lev:30  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:441  Ac:55  Exp:310
A massive elephantine form with eyes twisted by madness.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is faster
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1127.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which incur beserk rage; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It pays very little attention
 to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can trample to batter you for 4d6 damage, trample to batter you 
 for 4d6 damage and crush to hurt you for 4d4 damage.  

The Young amethyst dragon  (Violet 'd')
=== Num:766  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:310
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of brilliant 
 amethyst cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 30 and
 moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 1127.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid or time powerfully; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to acid.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 6 adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Fright  (Light Pink 'G')
=== Num:839  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:42  Ac:26  Exp:310
It is a terrifying, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 30 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 1127.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which teleport to, drain mana or 
 terrify; 1 time in 12.  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold, poison
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 170 feet.  It may
 carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It
 can touch to terrify you for 1d6 damage and touch to drain experience (by
 20d6+) from you for 1d6 damage.  

The Fanged horror  (Light Red 'H')
=== Num:892  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:253  Ac:70  Exp:310
A ghastly hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly those with
 teeth and fangs.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 1127.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d11 damage, bite to wound you for 4d9 
 damage, sting to hurt you for 1d9 damage and crush to hurt you for 2d7 damage.


The Forest giant  (Green 'P')
=== Num:1023  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:275  Ac:65  Exp:310
A fifteen foot tall giant with legs like tree-trunks.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1127.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to wound you for 3d10 damage; 1 time
 in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  It needs lite to see you.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, 
 musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 6d8 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 6d8 damage.  

The Abyss spider  (Light Green 'S')
=== Num:1202  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:187  Ac:28  Exp:310
A massive spider, heaving the bloated bag of its body between great spined legs.
This evil insect is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves quickly, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1127.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It
 may breathe poison or darkness; 1 time in 7 and is also magical, casting spells
 which create darkness, create traps, blind, confuse or slow; 1 time in 7.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It appears in a
 giant web.  It is hurt by bright light.  It resists darkness.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can claw
to wound you for 1d9 damage, sting to hurt and poison you for 3d9 damage and 
 bite to confuse you for 1d9 damage.  

The Zombified drake  (Mustard 'D')
=== Num:1286  Lev:30  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:310
It is the reanimated form of a dragon, with an open wound of a mouth.  This
 evil undead dragon is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves at normal
 speed, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 1127.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may create an arc to 
 cover you in blood for 16d6 damage and may breathe disease powerfully; 1 time
 in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

[U] the Emperor Wight of Carn Dum  (Red 'W')
=== Num:1081  Lev:30  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:350  Ac:40  Exp:1900
Your life force is torn from your body as this powerful unearthly being
 approaches. It whispers dreadful words of ancient songs, cold and unearthly.  
 This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 30 and moves
 quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth 6909.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which produce nether bolts, curse you, cause wounds, terrify or paralyze; 1
 time in 5.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists darkness.  
 It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 good weapons, armours
 , garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  It can hit to paralyze 
 you for 1d12 damage, hit to blind you for 1d12 damage, doubled against eye
 monsters, touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you and touch to drain 
 experience (by 80d6+) from you.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

The Thie|f|f|ves|  (Violet 't')
=== Num:354  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:94  Ac:30  Exp:310
Cool and confident, fast and lithe; protect your possessions quickly!  This
 evil woman thief is normally found on dungeon level 31 and moves very quickly,
 but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1155.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create a shot to hurt you; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport-self to, 
 teleport to, create darkness, create traps, blind or slow; 1 time in 5.  She
 can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and 
 hide in unusual places.  She needs lite to see you.  She takes quite a while
 to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up to 4 
 weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, 
 potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 6d13 damage, 
 hit to steal gold from you and hit to steal items from you.  

The Rod mimic  (White '-')
=== Num:1151  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:352  Ac:40  Exp:310
A strange creature that disguises itself as a rod to lure unsuspecting
 adventurers within reach of its venomous claws.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 31 and moves at normal speed, but is faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 1155.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 balls of light, invoke darkness storms, produce confusion balls, produce shard
 balls, produce water bolts, produce mana bolts, produce lightening beams, 
 produce ice beams or haste-self; 1 time in 3.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  It
 cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to
 3 special objects or treasures.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 
 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 4d4 damage, trample to confuse you for
 4d4 damage and trample to confuse you for 4d4 damage.  

The Earth spirit  (Mud 'E')
=== Num:219  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:54  Ac:40  Exp:330
A whirling mass of sentient rock.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 31 and moves a bit erratically at normal speed, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 1230.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It can pass through walls and dig through earth and rubble.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  
 It is immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept, slowed or 
 paralyzed.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.
It can hit to batter you for 2d7 damage and hit to batter you for 2d7 damage.  

The Wood elf |lord|lady|lords|  (Magenta-Pink 'l')
=== Num:246  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:133  Ac:40  Exp:330
A elven figure in armour and radiating power.  This elf warrior mage is
 normally found on dungeon level 31 and moves quickly, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1230.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She may create an arrow to hurt you for 15d6 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce balls of light, produce fire bolts, 
 produce frost bolts, haste-self, recover mana, teleport-self to, create
 darkness, summon similar monsters, blind or confuse; 1 time in 5.  She can 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She lights up the
 surroundings.  She resists lite.  She takes quite a while to see intruders,
 which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up to 3 weapons, missile
 weapons, garments, lites, adornments, written items, musical items, potions or 
 edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d10 damage and hit to hurt you for
 3d10 damage.  

The Xorn  (Umber 'X')
=== Num:376  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:135  Ac:80  Exp:330
A huge creature of the element Earth.  Able to merge with its element, it has
 four huge arms protruding from its enormous torso.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 31 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1230.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It can pass through walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to lightning
 , fire, cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit 
 to hurt you for 1d16 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d16 damage.  

The Olog  (Yellow 'T')
=== Num:363  Lev:31  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:378  Ac:50  Exp:340
It is a massive intelligent troll with needle-sharp fangs.  This evil troll is
 normally found on dungeon level 31 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 1267.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you; 1 time in 12.  It
 can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can crush to hurt you for 4d8 damage, hit to batter you for 2d12 
 damage and bite to wound you for 1d21 damage.  

The Clawed horror  (Light Pink 'H')
=== Num:893  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:286  Ac:75  Exp:340
A ghastly hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly those with
 claws and talons.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 31 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 1267.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can claw to wound you for 3d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d10 
 damage, sting to hurt you for 1d10 damage and crush to hurt you for 2d8 damage
 .  

The Stone giant  (Light Slate 'P')
=== Num:230  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:283  Ac:75  Exp:360
It is eighteen feet tall with skin hewn from stone.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 31 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1341.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to blast you with shards for 3d10 
 damage; 1 time in 5.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down
 doors and pick up objects.  It needs lite to see you.  It is hurt by rock
 remover.  It resists edged weapons.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two chests, musical items, 
 potions, edible items or treasures.  It can hit to batter you for 7d8 damage
 and hit to batter you for 7d8 damage.  

The 4-headed hydra  (Yellow 'y')
=== Num:270  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:301  Ac:70  Exp:360
A strange reptilian hybrid with four heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 31 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 1341.82 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which terrify
 ; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It resists blindness.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 4 treasures.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Doombat  (Blue Slate 'b')
=== Num:606  Lev:31  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:153  Ac:75  Exp:360
It is a fast moving creature of chaos, a gigantic black bat surrounded by
 flickering bright red flames.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 31 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 1341.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength
 .  It must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 160 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to burn you for 5d4 damage, bite to burn you for 5d4 damage and 
 bite to burn you for 5d4 damage.  

The Corruption Vortex  (Light Green 'v')
=== Num:1103  Lev:31  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:177  Ac:40  Exp:370
A toxic whirlpool, it's foulness can be sensed from afar.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 31 and moves extremely erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 1379.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may breathe poison, nexus or disease powerfully; 1
 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and communicate telepathically with its own
 kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can envelope 
 to infect you with disease for 4d6 damage, envelope to poison you for 4d6 
 damage and envelope to blast you with nexus for 4d6 damage.  

[U] Azog, Orc King of Moria  (Light Violet 'o')
=== Num:262  Lev:31  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:756  Ac:80  Exp:2000
He is also known as the King of Khazad-dum.  This evil orc is normally found on
 dungeon level 31 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 7454.55
 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He may 
 create an arrow to hurt you for 12d6 damage; 1 time in 4.  He can open doors, 
 bash down doors, pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water
 .  He is immune to poison.  He resists darkness.  He takes a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with
 escorts.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, missile weapons, armours, 
 garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt you for 5d5 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage.  It
 is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Boromir, son of Denethor  (Green 't')
=== Num:1083  Lev:31  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:2200
The once noble son of the steward of Gondor has been driven mad by his lust for
 the ring of Power.  He believes you have it.  This man warrior is normally
 found on dungeon level 31 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 8200.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native
 depth.  He may create an arrow to hurt you for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells which summon monsters of the same class; 1 time
 in 10.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good 
 weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to wound you for 5d5 damage, hit to wound
you for 5d5 damage and hit to wound you for 5d5 damage.  

[U] Faramir, son of Denethor  (Light Green 't')
=== Num:1084  Lev:31  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:2200
The still-noble son of the steward of Gondor guards the depths of Ithilien
 against the Enemy. You are an intruder here.  This man warrior is normally
 found on dungeon level 31 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 8200.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his native
 depth.  He may create an arrow to hurt you for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells which summon monsters of the same class; 1 time
 in 10.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick
 up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good 
 weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to wound you for 5d5 damage, hit to wound
you for 5d5 damage and hit to wound you for 5d5 damage.  It is a dungeon
 guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Impact hound  (Light Umber 'Z')
=== Num:368  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:181  Ac:30  Exp:85
A deep brown shape is visible before you, its canine form strikes you with an
 almost physical force.  The dungeon floor buckles as if struck by a powerful
 blow as it stalks towards you.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level
 32 and moves at normal speed, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 324.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe force; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite
to batter you for 2d8 damage, bite to batter you for 2d8 damage and claw to 
 batter you for 2d8 damage.  

The Shimmering vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Light Yellow 'v')
=== Num:410  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+30  Hp:162  Ac:40  Exp:360
A strange pillar of shining light that hurts your eyes.  Its shape changes
 constantly as it cuts through the air towards you.  It is like a beacon, waking
 monsters from their slumber.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level
 32 and moves extremely erratically and incredibly quickly, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 1374.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  
 and may breathe light or darkness powerfully; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down
 doors and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists blindness, lite
 and darkness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can 
 envelope to blast you with powerful light for 2d4 damage, envelope to blast 
 you with powerful darkness for 2d4 damage and envelope to blind you for 2d4 
 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Kudzu  (Green ':')
=== Num:678  Lev:32  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:288  Ac:20  Exp:360
It is a dangerous mass of razor sharp branches, growing furiously.  This evil 
 plant is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves a bit erratically and
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase
 intruders.  A kill of this creature is worth 1374.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 60 feet.  It can crush to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage.  

The Young multi-hued dragon  (Violet 'd')
=== Num:380  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:370
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of shimmering and
 magical colours and shades cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 1412.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost or poison powerfully; 1
 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which terrify powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 adornments or treasures.  
 It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Giant vampire bat  (Violet 'b')
=== Num:731  Lev:32  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:183  Ac:40  Exp:370
A gargantuan undead bat that flies at you. It could bite your head off!  This
 evil undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves somewhat
 erratically and quickly.  Destruction of this creature is worth 1412.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can fly
 over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It regenerates quickly.  It is immune to 
 cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for
 3d4 damage and bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 3d4 damage.  

The Wood elf assassin  (Violet 'l')
=== Num:959  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+15  Hp:93  Ac:30  Exp:370
An elven assassin, so stealthy that she is almost impossible to see.  This elf
 thief is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves very quickly, but is 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1412.73 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create a dart to poison you for 16d4 damage; 1 time in 5
 .  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and hide in unusual
 places.  She is invisible.  She resists lite.  She cannot be confused, charmed
 or slept.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She may carry a weapon, missile weapon, garment, lite, adornment, 
 written item, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  She can hit to 
 hurt and poison you for 8d4 damage, hit to hurt and poison you for 8d4 damage
 and hit to reduce constitution from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Creeping diamond gems  (White '$')
=== Num:1115  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:147  Ac:150  Exp:370
It appears to be a pile of diamonds, slithering toward you on lots of tiny legs.
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves quickly.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 1412.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning and poison.  
 It resists blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may carry up to 4
gem stones.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d6 damage, touch to poison
you for 3d6 damage, hit to batter you for 1d10 damage and hit to batter you for
 1d11 damage.  

The Young chromatic dragon  (Umber 'd')
=== Num:1118  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:370
It has a form that legends are made of.  Beautiful scales of shimmering and
 magical colours cover it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level
 32 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 1412.73 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may
 breathe lightning, fire or poison powerfully; 1 time in 6 and is also magical,
 casting spells which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 6.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and 
 poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 5 adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Mana fl|y|y|ies|  (Light Purple 'I')
=== Num:1198  Lev:32  Rar:8  Spd:+20  Hp:4  Ac:14  Exp:370
Small fragments of mana, given temporary life by magical fluctuations.  This 
 insect is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves extremely erratically
 and very quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1412.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its
 native depth.  It may explodes you for 2d10 damage; 1 time in 20 and is also
 magical, casting spells which blink-self; 1 time in 2.  It can pass through
 walls and easily evade blows and missiles.  It must fly and cannot move
 underwater or through webs.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It breeds
 explosively.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It can bite 
 to drain mana from you and explodes you for 2d10 damage.  

The Great eagle  (Light Violet 'B')
=== Num:1361  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:261  Ac:65  Exp:380
Greater and more intelligent than most of its kind, this great eagle is a
 messenger between the forces of good.  It has not yet heard of you, however.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves quickly.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1450.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors and fly over obstacles
 .  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 6d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 6d3 damage and bite 
 to hurt you for 3d6 damage.  

The Basilisk  (Purple 'R')
=== Num:308  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:255  Ac:90  Exp:390
An evil reptile that preys on unsuspecting travellers.  Its eyes stare deeply
 at you and your soul starts to wilt!  This animal is normally found on dungeon
 level 32 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1489.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may gaze to petrify you and may breathe 
 poison; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 150 feet.  It may carry one or two garments or junk items.  It can 
 gaze to petrify you and bite to hurt you for 2d24 damage.  

The Mature bronze dragon  (Light Umber 'D')
=== Num:386  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:344  Ac:70  Exp:390
A large dragon with scales of rich bronze.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1489.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe fire or confusion powerfully; 1 time in 10 and
 is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 
 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for
 2d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d8 
 damage.  

The Multi-hued hound  (Violet 'Z')
=== Num:616  Lev:32  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:203  Ac:40  Exp:390
Shimmering in rainbow hues and shades, this hound is beautiful and deadly.  
 This animal is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1489.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may
 breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost or poison; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  
 It usually appears in groups.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, claw to
hurt you for 2d8 damage, bite to hurt you for 4d4 damage and bite to hurt you 
 for 4d4 damage.  

The Black bishop  (Light Dark 'p')
=== Num:1021  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:196  Ac:65  Exp:390
She is a figure encased in deep black plate armour and wielding a black spiked
 mace.  This evil woman warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 32
 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 1489.09 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which invoke darkness storms, heal-self, cure-self, cause wounds
 , incur heroism, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  She can carry a
 lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  
 She resists nether.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may
 notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up to 3 weapons, armours, garments, lites
 , adornments, written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit 
 to hurt you for 5d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage and hit to hurt you
for 5d5 damage.  

The Sylph  (Teal 'E')
=== Num:1240  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:54  Ac:12  Exp:390
A vicarious spirit of the high clouds, winged and casting spells whistfuly.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves very quickly, but
 is faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 1489.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce lightning bolts, 
 recover mana, blink-self, cause hallucinations or slow; 1 time in 4.  It can 
 open doors, fly over obstacles and easily evade blows and missiles.  It is
 immune to lightning.  It resists edged and blunt weapons.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 180 feet.  It may carry one
 or two junk items or treasures.  It can touch to electrify you for 2d6 damage.


The Skeleton giant  (Light Purple 's')
=== Num:1298  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:219  Ac:45  Exp:390
It is a ten foot tall animated giant skeleton.  This evil undead giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 1489.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for
 2d10 damage; 1 time in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors and 
 bash down doors.  It needs lite to see you.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a weapon, armour, adornment or treasure.  
 It can hit to batter you for 4d8 damage and hit to batter you for 4d8 damage.  
 

The Killer iridescent beetle  (Violet 'K')
=== Num:399  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:330  Ac:60  Exp:400
It is a giant beetle, whose carapace shimmers with vibrant energies.  This 
 insect is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1527.27 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can 
 bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to lightning.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 160 feet.  It can claw to electrify you for 8d3 damage, claw 
 to electrify you for 8d3 damage and bite to batter you for 8d3 damage.  

The Mature red dragon  (Red 'D')
=== Num:402  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:400
A large dragon, scales tinted deep red.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is worth
 1527.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.  

The Mature black dragon  (Light Dark 'D')
=== Num:405  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:400
A large dragon, with scales of deepest black.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1527.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe acid powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify or confuse powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to acid.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.  

The Land drake  (Mud 'D')
=== Num:774  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:400
It is a wingless dragon with short clumsy legs shaped like shovels.  Fire and
 acidic fumes belch from its mouth.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 1527.27 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid or fire powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, pass through walls, dig through earth and
 rubble and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid
 and fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests
 , armours or adornments.  It can claw to batter you for 2d4 damage, claw to 
 batter you for 2d4 damage and bite to wound you for 3d6 damage.  

The Idolan  (Light Yellow 'G')
=== Num:840  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:42  Ac:28  Exp:400
It is a shimmering, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 32 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 1527.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which blink-self, teleport-self, 
 create darkness or confuse; 1 time in 12.  It can pass through walls and fly
 over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is
 immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 180 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, 
 junk items or treasures.  It can touch to blind you for 1d7 damage, doubled
 against eye monsters and touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 1d7 
 damage.  

The Swamp giant  (Mud 'P')
=== Num:1025  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:278  Ac:70  Exp:400
A seventeen foot tall giant with putrid hair and slimey skin.  This evil giant
 is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1527.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt and poison you for 3d10 
 damage; 1 time in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down
 doors, pick up objects and swim under water.  It needs lite to see you.  It is
 immune to acid and poison.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible item
 or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 7d8 damage and hit to hurt you for
 7d8 damage.  

The Venom mold  (Light Green 'm')
=== Num:1205  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:270  Ac:10  Exp:410
A pestiferous growth on the dungeon floor; its spores are deadly.  This plant
 is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper
 in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1565.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  ; 1 time in 3.  It can communicate telepathically with its own
 kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to poison.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40 feet.  It can 
 touch to poison you for 3d12 damage and touch to infect you with disease for
 3d12 damage.  

The Naiad  (Violet 'E')
=== Num:1243  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:76  Ac:12  Exp:410
A sensuous spirit of water, awash with emotion and casting spells passionately.
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves quickly, but is 
 faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 1565.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce frost bolts, 
 recover mana, blink-self, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, 
 bash down doors, swim under water and easily evade blows and missiles.  It is
 immune to cold.  It resists edged and blunt weapons.  It is fairly observant
 of intruders, which it may notice from 180 feet.  It may carry one or two junk
 items or treasures.  It can touch to blast you with water for 2d6 damage.  

The Commanding spirit  (Light Slate 'G')
=== Num:864  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:44  Ac:20  Exp:430
A ghostly apparition that commands horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 1641.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which teleport-self or teleport to; 1 time in 6.  It can pass through walls
 and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or 
 cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  
 It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or 
 treasures.  It can touch to reduce strength and size from you for 1d6 damage
 and touch to reduce strength and size from you for 1d6 damage.  

The Grey giant  (Slate 'P')
=== Num:1026  Lev:32  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:301  Ac:70  Exp:430
It is sixteen feet tall and drained of color.  This evil giant is normally
 found on dungeon level 32 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1641.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 3d10 damage; 1 time in 10.  
 It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects
 .  It needs lite to see you.  It is immune to fire and cold.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, 
 musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 7d8 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 7d8 damage.  

[U] Ulfang the Black  (Light Dark 't')
=== Num:355  Lev:32  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:2900
A short and swarthy Easterling dressed in black.  He and his three sons once
 openly swore allegiance to the High Elves, but were secretly in the pay of
 Morgoth.  This evil man is normally found on dungeon level 32 and moves
 quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 11072.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells
 which summon similar monsters; 1 time in 10.  He can carry a lite to see you, 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  
 He takes quite a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  
 He may carry up to 3 good weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical
 items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to wound you for 5d5 damage, hit 
 to wound you for 5d5 damage, hit to wound you for 5d5 damage and hit to wound 
 you for 5d5 damage.  

The Purple slime  (Purple ',')
=== Num:664  Lev:33  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:17  Ac:1  Exp:34
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 33 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 132.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it
 may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 reduce constitution from you for 1d4 damage and touch to reduce constitution
 from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Blue slime  (Blue ',')
=== Num:666  Lev:33  Rar:5  Spd:+5  Hp:25  Ac:1  Exp:49
Ugh! It quickly creeps along the dungeon floor.  This plant is normally found 
 on dungeon level 33 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 191.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at
 its native depth.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it
 may notice from 40 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can touch to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 1d4 damage and touch to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 1d4 damage.  

The Gravity hound  (Light Slate 'Z')
=== Num:365  Lev:33  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:154  Ac:100  Exp:170
Unfettered by the usual constraints of gravity, these unnatural creatures are
 walking on the walls and even the ceiling!  The earth suddenly feels rather
 less solid as you see gravity warp all round the monsters.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 664.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe gravity; 1
 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, climb on walls and ceilings and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It cannot be confused, charmed
 or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can bite to batter you for 2d8 damage
 , bite to batter you for 2d8 damage and claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Creeping adamantite coins||||  (Light Green '$')
=== Num:292  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:234  Ac:50  Exp:420
It appears to be a pile of coins made of precious adamant, slithering toward
 you on lots of tiny legs.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 33
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 1641.82 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire and poison.
It resists blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 50 feet.  It may carry up to 4
precious metals.  It can hit to batter you for 3d10 damage and touch to remove 
 enchantments from you.  

The Ogre chieftain||ess|s|  (Light Violet 'O')
=== Num:610  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:214  Ac:55  Exp:420
This ogre is leader of his tribe.  She sneers at you as she advances towards
 you, wielding a huge club and pushing her own followers rudely aside.  This
 evil giant is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1641.82 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors and track you over land,
 but not through water.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she
 may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry a 
 chest, weapon, armour, garment, tool, edible item or junk item.  She can hit 
 to batter you for 3d8 damage, hit to batter you for 3d8 damage, hit to batter 
 you for 3d8 damage and hit to batter you for 3d8 damage.  

The Two-headed giant  (Light Red 'P')
=== Num:1028  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:342  Ac:60  Exp:420
It is a twenty-one foot tall giant with two bickering heads.  This evil giant
 is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves a bit erratically at normal
 speed, but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 1641.82 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for
 4d10 damage; 1 time in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  It needs lite to see you.  It resists 
 blindness.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.
It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure.  It can 
 hit to batter you for 8d8 damage, hit to batter you for 8d8 damage and bite to
hurt you for 10d4 damage.  

The Iron golem  (Slate 'g')
=== Num:258  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:-5  Hp:437  Ac:80  Exp:430
It is a massive metal statue that moves steadily towards you.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves slowly, but is larger, faster, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 1680.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may create a spike to hurt you for 8d4 damage and may 
 grow ammunition; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 poison balls; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison
 and edged weapons.  It resists blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage.  

The Archpriest||ess|s|  (Yellow 'p')
=== Num:470  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:458  Ac:60  Exp:430
An evil priestessshisher  This evil woman priest is normally found on dungeon
 level 33 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 1680.91 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce cone of hellfire, recover mana, heal-self, 
 cure-self, curse you, cause wounds, incur heroism, summon a monster, summon an
 undead, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  She can carry a lite to see you, open
 doors and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  She cannot be confused
 , charmed or slept.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may
 notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up to 4 weapons, armours, garments, lites
 , adornments, written items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt you
for 3d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d4 
 damage.  

The Tentacled horror  (Light Yellow 'H')
=== Num:891  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:329  Ac:65  Exp:430
A ghastly hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly those with
 tentacles and suckers.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 33 and
 moves quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 1680.91 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 1d10 damage, bite to hurt you for 1d8 
 damage, sting to reduce strength and size from you for 1d8 damage and crush to
hurt you for 6d6 damage.  

The Mature grey dragon  (Slate 'D')
=== Num:1123  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:450
A large dragon, with scales of all the shades of grey.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 1759.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It may breathe acid powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 acid and cold.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.  

The Mature yellow dragon  (Yellow 'D')
=== Num:1128  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:450
A large dragon, with scales of buttercup yellow.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 33 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1759.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe fire or poison powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 fire and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 
 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.


The Mature cyan dragon  (Teal 'D')
=== Num:1132  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:450
A large dragon, with scales of bright cyan.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 33 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1759.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe lightning or poison powerfully; 1 time in 8 and
 is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 lightning and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 
 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.


The Mature purple dragon  (Purple 'D')
=== Num:1136  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:450
A large dragon, with scales of imperial purple.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 33 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1759.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe lightning or fire powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 lightning and fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 
 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.


The Inertia drake  (Light Slate 'D')
=== Num:1143  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:387  Ac:70  Exp:450
A dragon that seems to be hardly moving at all, yet it approaches you with
 deadly menace.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 33 and
 moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 1759.09 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe inertia powerfully; 1 time
 in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse
 or slow powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 4 chests, armours or adornments.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 4d3 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d3 damage and bite 
 to hurt you for 4d6 damage.  

The Watch dragon  (Light Green 'D')
=== Num:785  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:404  Ac:80  Exp:460
A large dragon, scales tinted stony grey to blend to its surroundings.  This
 evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves at normal speed,
 but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1798.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe wind powerfully; 1 time in 10 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which give invisibility, terrify or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to acid.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 one or two chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you 
 for 2d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt you for
 4d10 damage.  

The Reflection  (Mustard 'G')
=== Num:841  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:51  Ac:29  Exp:460
It is a twisted, ghostly form.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 33 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more powerful
 or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 1798.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which drain mana, summon similar monsters
 or confuse; 1 time in 12.  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold, poison
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 190 feet.  It may
 carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It
 can touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 2d4 damage and touch to 
 drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 2d4 damage.  

The Mana vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Violet 'v')
=== Num:1217  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+30  Hp:259  Ac:30  Exp:460
Raw magic, driven by raw magic, a whirling devastation.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves extremely erratically and
 incredibly quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 1798.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.   and may breathe mana; 1
 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, leave a trail behind it and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 resists blindness, magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 220 feet.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Cloud giant  (Blue 'P')
=== Num:247  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:323  Ac:60  Exp:470
It is a twenty foot tall giant wreathed in clouds.  This evil giant is normally
 found on dungeon level 33 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1837.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may throw a boulder at to cover you with ice for 3d10 damage; 1
 time in 6.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and 
 pick up objects.  It needs lite to see you.  It is immune to lightning.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 chests, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  It can hit
to batter you for 8d8 damage and hit to electrify you for 8d8 damage.  

The Chanting spirit  (Blue Slate 'G')
=== Num:865  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:48  Ac:20  Exp:470
A ghostly apparition that chants horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 1837.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which teleport-self or summon a monster; 1 time in 6.  It can pass through
 walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 140 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items
 or treasures.  It can touch to reduce intelligence from you for 1d7 damage and 
 touch to reduce intelligence from you for 1d7 damage.  

The Shadow drake  (Blue Slate 'D')
=== Num:319  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:258  Ac:70  Exp:480
It is a dragon-like form wrapped in shadow.  Glowing red eyes shine out in the
 dark.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 1876.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe darkness powerfully; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which give invisibility, 
 create darkness, terrify, confuse or slow powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, pass through walls, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 cold.  It resists nether and darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for
 2d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite to freeze you for 3d6 
 damage.  

The Time vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Light Blue 'v')
=== Num:409  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:162  Ac:40  Exp:480
You haven't seen it yet.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 33
 and moves extremely erratically and very quickly, but is larger or faster
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 1876.36 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.   and may
 breathe time powerfully; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can 
 envelope to take you back in time for 5d5 damage.  

The Shardstorm  (Umber 'v')
=== Num:613  Lev:33  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:172  Ac:12  Exp:490
A howling blast of razor-sharp mountain fragments, kept intact by perilous
 magics.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves
 somewhat erratically and quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 1915.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.   and may breathe shards
 powerfully; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 resists blindness, edged and blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused
 , charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may
 notice from 400 feet.  It can envelope to blast you with shards for 6d6 damage
 .  

The War troll  (Light Slate 'T')
=== Num:1064  Lev:33  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:400  Ac:100  Exp:490
A massive troll, equipped with a scimitar, crossbow and heavy armour.  This
 evil troll warrior is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves quickly, but
 is larger, older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 1915.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is deadly at
 her native depth.  She may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 10d7 damage;
 1 time in 10.  She can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength and track you over land, but not through water.  She is immune to 
 poison.  She cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  She tends to
 overlook intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She usually appears
 in groups.  She may carry a chest, weapon, missile weapon, garment, edible item
 , junk item or treasure.  She can hit to wound you for 3d5 damage, hit to 
 wound you for 3d5 damage and hit to wound you for 3d5 damage.  

[U] Castamir the Usurper  (Light Red 'q')
=== Num:408  Lev:33  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:722  Ac:90  Exp:2300
A Black Numenorean who usurped the throne of Gondor, he is treacherous and evil.
This evil man is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 8990.91 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce lightning bolts, produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, 
 produce ice bolts, heal-self or create traps; 1 time in 2.  He can carry a
 lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  He needs
 lite to see you.  He takes quite a while to see intruders, which he may notice
 from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, garments, lites, adornments
 , magical devices, written items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt
you for 5d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d5 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage.  

[U] Meneldor the Swift  (Umber 'B')
=== Num:1365  Lev:33  Rar:4  Spd:+30  Hp:696  Ac:65  Exp:2500
Among all the eagles of Middle-earth he is the swiftest, and in his time has
 borne messages between all of the Wise.  He is looking for Gandalf the Grey and
 believes you withhold that information from him.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 33 and moves somewhat erratically and incredibly
 quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 9772.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may shriek to do you no
 effect; 1 time in 20 and is also magical, casting spells which summon similar
 monsters; 1 time in 20.  It can fly over obstacles.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can claw to hurt you for 7d3 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 7d3 damage, bite to hurt you for 3d7 damage and 
 shriek to do you no effect.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress
 further.  

[U] Maglor, Son of Feanor  (Magenta-Pink 'l')
=== Num:1144  Lev:33  Rar:6  Spd:+5  Hp:778  Ac:68  Exp:4300
The second son of Feanor, for centuries he faithfully defended Maglor's gap
 from attack by the north.  He took the Oath of Feanor with his father and
 brothers, and fought well at Nirnaeth Arnoediad. He grew to resent the oath he
 took, and became corrupted by his desire to recover the three Silmarils.  This
 evil elf is normally found on dungeon level 33 and moves quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 16809.09 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 deadly at his native depth.  He may create an arrow to hurt you for 22d6 
 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 haste-self, heal-self, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors, bash down doors and pick up
 objects.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He prefers to ignore intruders, which he may notice from
 300 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites
 , adornments, written items, musical items, potions or edible items.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 12d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 12d5 damage.  

The Inertia hound  (Mud 'Z')
=== Num:367  Lev:34  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:181  Ac:30  Exp:200
Bizarrely, this hound seems to be hardly moving at all, yet it approaches you
 with deadly menace.  It makes you tired just to look at it.  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 800.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe inertia; 1
 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not
 through water.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage and claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Guard drake  (Orange 'D')
=== Num:771  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:282  Ac:60  Exp:480
A fierce looking red dragon, with a studded iron collar and huge fangs. Smoke
 pours from its mouth, but the fire beneath is almost choked out.  This evil 
 dragon is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 1920.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may spit to burn you for 10d10 damage; 1 time in 4.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can 
 claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d8 damage, bite to burn
you for 3d8 damage and spit to burn you for 10d10 damage.  

The Incanting spirit  (Light Teal 'G')
=== Num:866  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:52  Ac:20  Exp:480
A ghostly apparition that incants horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 1920.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which teleport-self, curse you or cause wounds; 1 time in 6.  It can 
 pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical
 items, junk items or treasures.  It can touch to reduce wisdom from you for
 1d7 damage and touch to reduce wisdom from you for 1d7 damage.  

The Mature gold dragon  (Yellow 'D')
=== Num:403  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:490
A large dragon with scales of gleaming gold.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1960.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe poison or sound powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify or confuse powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to poison.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 
 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  It can claw to batter you for
 2d10 damage, claw to batter you for 2d10 damage and bite to batter you for
 4d10 damage.  

The Ghast  (Light Pink 'z')
=== Num:600  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:149  Ac:50  Exp:490
This vile abomination is a relative of ghouls, and often leads packs of them.
 It smells foul, and its bite carries a rotting disease.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 1960.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which terrify or paralyze; 1 time
 in 6.  It can open doors, bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength
 .  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be frightened, 
 charmed or slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears with escorts.  It may carry a weapon, armour, 
 adornment, magical device or treasure.  It can hit to hurt and poison you for
 4d9 damage, touch to paralyze you for 2d4 damage, touch to reduce constitution
 from you for 2d4 damage and bite to infect you with disease for 2d4 damage.  

The Mountain giant  (Violet 'P')
=== Num:1027  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:333  Ac:60  Exp:490
It is a twenty-three foot tall giant rugged as the mountain.  This evil giant
 is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1960.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to batter you for 3d10 damage; 1 time
 in 10.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, pick up
 objects and climb on walls and ceilings.  It needs lite to see you.  It is
 hurt by rock remover.  It resists edged weapons.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical
 item, potion, edible item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 9d8 
 damage and hit to batter you for 9d8 damage.  

The Sea giant  (Teal 'P')
=== Num:1030  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:360  Ac:60  Exp:490
It is a twenty-four foot tall giant surrounded by waves.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 1960.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to lash you with wind, rain and
 lightning for 5d10 damage; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells
 which produce water bolts, terrify or confuse; 1 time in 8.  It can carry a
 lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and swim under
 water.  It needs lite to see you.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible
 item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 10d8 damage and hit to batter 
 you for 10d8 damage.  

The Mature silver dragon  (Light Slate 'D')
=== Num:778  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:420  Ac:80  Exp:500
A large dragon, scales tinted deep silver.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe frost or fear powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify or confuse powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 6 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  
 It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.  

The Eldrak  (Red 'T')
=== Num:420  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:630  Ac:80  Exp:520
A massive troll, larger and stronger than many men together.  This evil troll
 is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 , older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 2080.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you; 1 time in 12.  It
 can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, pick up
 objects and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, weapon, 
 garment, edible item, junk item or treasure.  It can hit to batter you for
 4d10 damage, crush to hurt you for 4d6 damage and bite to wound you for 1d13 
 damage.  

The Gauth  (Light Red 'e')
=== Num:590  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:270  Ac:50  Exp:520
Another lesser relative of the beholder, this six-eyed creature feeds on magic.
This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal
 speed, but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 2080.00 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to disenchant your armour and
 weapons for 5d2 damage, gaze to disenchant your armour and weapons for 5d2 
 damage, gaze to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 5d2 damage or 
 gaze to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 5d2 damage; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce frost balls, produce
 lightning bolts, teleport away, drain mana, cause wounds, probe your weaknesses
 or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and
 wands.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It can gaze to disenchant your armour and weapons for 5d2 damage, gaze to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 5d2 damage, gaze to drain charges from 
 your wands and staffs for 5d2 damage and gaze to drain charges from your wands
 and staffs for 5d2 damage.  

The Mature copper dragon  (Umber 'D')
=== Num:777  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:404  Ac:80  Exp:520
A large dragon, scales tinted deep copper.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2080.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe lightning or nexus powerfully; 1 time in 8 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify or confuse powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to lightning.  It resists nexus.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 6 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  It can claw
to hurt you for 2d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to hurt 
 you for 4d10 damage.  

The Aranea  (Light Pink 'S')
=== Num:602  Lev:34  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:273  Ac:45  Exp:530
An intelligent arachnid whose hairy legs weave spells in the air.  This evil 
 insect is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2120.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce fire bolts, 
 produce mana bolts, cause wounds, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It can open
 doors, bash down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.  It appears in a giant
 web.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to poison.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can claw to hurt and poison you for 2d8 damage, claw to hurt and
 poison you for 2d8 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 2d6 damage and bite
to hurt and poison you for 2d6 damage.  

The Screaming spirit  (Light Pink 'G')
=== Num:867  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:56  Ac:20  Exp:530
A ghostly apparition that screams horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 2120.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which teleport-self, curse you or cause wounds; 1 time in 6.  It can pass
 through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 140 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, 
 junk items or treasures.  It can touch to reduce dexterity and agility from 
 you for 1d8 damage and touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 1d8 
 damage.  

The Hunting horror  (Light Slate 'H')
=== Num:894  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:309  Ac:80  Exp:540
A ghastly hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly those that
 hunt and rend.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill
 of this creature is worth 2160.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, swim under water and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can claw to wound you for 2d13 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d11 
 damage, sting to hurt and poison you for 2d11 damage and crush to batter you 
 for 4d9 damage.  

The Elven vampire  (Green 'V')
=== Num:357  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:300  Ac:60  Exp:550
A tall, deathly pale figure, garbed in luxurious black velvet.  Its fangs glint
 redly in the fading light, and its dead eyes latch like leeches onto yours.  
 This evil undead elf is normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 2200.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce
 mana bolts, teleport to, incur wraithform, create darkness, cause mind blasting
 , cause wounds, cause amnesia, terrify, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It
 can open doors, bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  
 It regenerates quickly.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and 
 poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 weapons, 
 armours, garments, adornments, magical devices, written items or treasures.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage, bite to
drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 1d4 damage and bite to drain 
 experience (by 40d6+) from you for 1d4 damage.  

The Wereworm  (Deep Light Blue 'w')
=== Num:280  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:516  Ac:70  Exp:560
A huge wormlike shape dripping acid, twisted by evil sorcery into a foul
 monster that breeds on death.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level
 34 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2240.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to drain 
 experience (by 20d6+) from you; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It is
 immune to acid.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 150 feet.  It can gaze to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you, crawl to 
 dissolve you for 6d4 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for 1d20 damage.  

The Chaos drake  (Light Purple 'D')
=== Num:339  Lev:34  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:430  Ac:70  Exp:560
A dragon twisted by the forces of chaos.  It seems first ugly, then fair, as
 its form shimmers and changes in front of your eyes.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 34 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2240.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may breathe chaos or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to fire.  It resists disenchantment and chaos.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage and bite 
 to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

[U] Beorn, the Shape-Changer  (Light Dark 'Q')
=== Num:566  Lev:34  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1232  Ac:60  Exp:1000
Beorn is only occasionally seen in human form these days, preferring to appear
 in the shape of a giant black bear:  he also prefers the company of beasts to
 that of humans.  He has never taken kindly to strangers, even in human form -
 and still less when in bear's shape, as he is now.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 34 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 4000.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  
 He can bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  He
 takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice from 250 feet.  He usually
 appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 3 good chests or garments.  He can 
 claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage, bite to 
 hurt you for 4d8 damage and crush to hurt you for 3d6 damage.  It is a dungeon
 guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Mim, Betrayer of Turin  (Orange 'h')
=== Num:290  Lev:34  Rar:7  Spd:+10  Hp:924  Ac:80  Exp:7300
The last of his race, Mim is a Petty-Dwarf.  Petty-Dwarves are strange
 creatures, powerful in sorcery and originating in the East.  They have been
 hunted nearly to extinction by the High Elves.  This evil dwarf is normally
 found on dungeon level 34 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 29200.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native
 depth.  He is magical, casting spells which produce acid balls, produce acid
 bolts, heal-self or terrify; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors and bash down
 doors.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He resists 
 blindness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while to see
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 3
 exceptional weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written
 items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to
hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage and hit to disenchant 
 your armour and weapons.  

The Nether hound  (Light Green 'Z')
=== Num:485  Lev:35  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:264  Ac:100  Exp:540
You feel a soul-tearing chill upon viewing this beast, a ghostly form of
 darkness in the shape of a large dog.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 2209.09 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe nether; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It
 resists nether.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage.


The Crystal drake  (Light Pink 'D')
=== Num:404  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:387  Ac:70  Exp:550
A dragon of strange crystalline form.  Light shines through it, dazzling your
 eyes with spectrums of colour.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 35 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2250.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe shards
 powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It
 can bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It lights
 up the surroundings.  It is immune to cold.  It resists edged weapons.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two chests, armours or 
 adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 4d3 damage, claw to wound you for
 4d3 damage and bite to wound you for 8d3 damage.  

The Wolf chieftain||ess|s|  (Light Violet 'C')
=== Num:607  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:465  Ac:20  Exp:550
A great wolf-chieftainess whose pack is in the service of the Dark Lord, and
 whose howls strike fear into even the boldest heart.  This evil animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is larger, older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2250.00
 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  
 She may wail to terrify you; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which create darkness; 1 time in 6.  She can open doors, bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over
 land, but not through water.  She is immune to acid and cold.  She cannot be 
 frightened.  She is observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She can claw to hurt you for 2d6 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d6 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d10 damage and 
 wail to terrify you.  

The Crystal mold  (Light Pink 'm')
=== Num:1208  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:375  Ac:45  Exp:550
A lovely shimmering form, with razor sharp spikes thrusting out in all
 directions. It patiently waits to destroy anyone who ventures nearby.  This 
 plant is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves very quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 2250.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may create a spike to wound you and may 
 grow ammunition; 1 time in 3.  It can communicate telepathically with its own
 kind.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to fire, cold and poison
 .  It resists blindness.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed
 or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 40
 feet.  It can hit to wound you for 8d8 damage and touch to reduce charisma from
you.  

The Mature brass dragon  (Orange 'D')
=== Num:779  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:404  Ac:80  Exp:560
A large dragon, scales tinted deep brass.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2290.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe acid or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 8
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to acid.  It resists disenchantment.  It cannot be confused, charmed
 or slept.  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals
 .  It can claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d10 damage
 and bite to hurt you for 4d10 damage.  

The Spectral hunter  (Light Red 'G')
=== Num:1196  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:159  Ac:20  Exp:560
A ghostly figure, sent to kill you.  It follows you consistently and unerringly.
This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2290.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It can open doors, pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It
 resists nether.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can hit 
 to hurt you for 4d6 damage.  

The Gelatinous cube  (Light Teal 'j')
=== Num:207  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:348  Ac:18  Exp:570
It is a strange, vast gelatinous structure that assumes cubic proportions as it
 lines all four walls of the corridors it patrols.  Through its semi-transparent
 jelly structure you can see treasures it has engulfed, and a few corpses as
 well.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal
 speed.  A kill of this creature is worth 2331.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It may spray to dissolve 
 you; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, 
 pick up objects, leave a trail behind it and communicate telepathically with
 its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry up to 6 adornments
 , potions, junk items or treasures.  It can touch to dissolve you for 3d10 
 damage and spray to dissolve you.  

The Enchant|er|ress|ers|  (Light Blue 'q')
=== Num:435  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:458  Ac:60  Exp:570
This elusive spellcaster has a special affinity for dragons, whom she rarely
 fights without.  This evil woman mage is normally found on dungeon level 35
 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 2331.82 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce mana bolts, haste-self, recover mana, 
 teleport-self, create a shield, summon a dragon, cause hallucinations, blind, 
 confuse or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 1
 .  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  She needs
 lite to see you.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up
 to 3 good weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical devices, written items
 , potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for 2d6 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 2d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Displacer beast  (Blue Slate 'f')
=== Num:285  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:132  Ac:100  Exp:590
It is a huge black panther, clubbed tentacles sprouting from its shoulders. It
 rapidly shifts between this world and another.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or older deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2413.64 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It can bash down
 doors, pass through walls, can eat bodies to regain strength, easily evade
 blows and missiles and track you over land, but not through water.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It can bite to 
 hurt you for 2d15 damage and claw to wound you for 2d15 damage.  

The Hand druj|||es|  (Yellow 's')
=== Num:499  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:468  Ac:110  Exp:590
A skeletal hand floating in the air, motionless except for its flexing fingers.
This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves very
 quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to
 chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth 2413.64 points for a
 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce acid bolts, produce lightning bolts
 , produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, teleport away, create darkness, 
 cause wounds, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 1.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Storm of Unmagic  (Violet 'v')
=== Num:614  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:290  Ac:40  Exp:600
Howling through the disintegrating dungeon, this whirlpool of Unmagic rips the
 enchantments from everything it touches.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 35 and moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger or 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 2454.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its native depth.  
 and may breathe disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors
 and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It resists disenchantment, blindness, magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed
 or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 500
 feet.  It can envelope to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 5d5 
 damage and envelope to disenchant your armour and weapons for 5d5 damage.  

The Mature chromatic dragon  (Umber 'D')
=== Num:1119  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:504  Ac:80  Exp:600
A large dragon, scales shimmering many colours.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 2454.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe lightning, fire or poison powerfully; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to lightning, fire and poison.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage.  

The Troll chieftain||ess|s|  (Violet 'T')
=== Num:612  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:419  Ac:50  Exp:610
This troll's great strength and size have won it the place of chieftain of her
 tribe. She fears nothing.  This evil troll is normally found on dungeon level
 35 and moves quickly, but is larger, older or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2495.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is challenging at her native depth.  She can open doors, bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, pick up objects and track you
 over land, but not through water.  She is immune to poison.  She cannot be 
 frightened.  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 300
 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry one or two chests, 
 weapons, garments, edible items, junk items or treasures.  She can hit to 
 batter you for 2d12 damage, hit to batter you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt
you for 3d6 damage.  

The Nalfeshnee  (Red 'U')
=== Num:458  Lev:35  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:810  Ac:50  Exp:620
It is a large demon with the head of a giant boar.  Flames run up and down its
 length.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves at
 normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 2536.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe fire powerfully;
 1 time in 8 and is also magical, casting spells which summon a demon, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can 
 open doors and bash down doors.  It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry one
 or two weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit to hurt you for 5d2 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d2 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d2 damage.  

The Gaunt soul  (Yellow 'G')
=== Num:855  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:58  Ac:20  Exp:620
It is starved away to nothing.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 35 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 2536.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which teleport-self, drain
 mana or cause hunger; 1 time in 5.  It can pass through walls, pick up objects
 and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, poison and 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 160 feet.  It may
 carry one or two garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It
 can bite to starve you for 2d4 damage, bite to starve you for 2d4 damage and 
 touch to eat your food for 2d4 damage.  

The Easterling  (Magenta-Pink 't')
=== Num:1058  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:480  Ac:100  Exp:620
Easterlings are an evil warrior people, dressed in blood-red armor and slaves
 to Morgoth. Once numerous, there constant wars with other races at Morgoth's
 command has left only the strongest of fighters behind.  This evil woman is
 normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is older, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2536.36 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you for 15d7 damage; 1
 time in 10.  She can carry a lite to see you.  She needs lite to see you.  She
 is immune to lightning, fire and cold.  She cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 250
 feet.  She may carry up to 3 weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, lites, 
 adornments, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to
wound you for 3d8 damage and hit to wound you for 3d8 damage.  

The Dervish|||es|  (Umber 'p')
=== Num:336  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:315  Ac:50  Exp:630
An adept at unarmed combat, the dervish strikes with stunning power.  She can
 summon help from nature and is able to focus his power to ease any pain.  This
woman shaman is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2577.27 points for a 1st level character.  She is challenging at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce acid
 balls, produce lightning balls, produce poison balls, produce water bolts, 
 cure-self, blink-self, teleport-self to, incur heroism, summon insects, summon
 animals or summon spiders; 1 time in 5.  She can carry a lite to see you, open
 doors and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  She is immune to acid
 and poison.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She may carry one or two 
 weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, potions or 
 edible items.  She can punch to hurt you for 2d11 damage and kick to batter 
 you for 18d2 damage.  

The Dark elven sorcere|r|ss|rs|  (Light Purple 'l')
=== Num:450  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:688  Ac:70  Exp:630
A elven figure, dressed in deepest black.  Power seems to crackle from her
 slender frame.  This evil elf mage is normally found on dungeon level 35 and
 moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 2577.27 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 challenging at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce acid balls, produce fire balls, produce frost balls, haste-self, 
 recover mana, blink-self, teleport-self to, create darkness, create a shield, 
 give resistance to the elements, summon a monster, summon a demon, summon an
 undead, blind or confuse; 1 time in 2.  She can open doors and bash down doors
 .  She is hurt by bright light.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 may carry up to 5 weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, 
 written items, musical items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt 
 you for 2d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage.  

The Hezrou  (Green 'U')
=== Num:452  Lev:35  Rar:5  Spd:-3  Hp:479  Ac:40  Exp:630
A sluggish demon of lizard form firing powerful missiles.  From the terribly
 oversized jaws to the stumpy lashing tail, pools of burning acid froth and
 sizzle.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves
 slowly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 2577.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may create a spike to hurt 
 you and may grow ammunition and may breathe acid or fire; 1 time in 2 and is
 also magical, casting spells which produce acid bolts or produce fire bolts; 1
 time in 2.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is immune to acid, fire
 and poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and
 wands.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears
 in groups.  It may carry one or two weapons, armours or written items.  It can 
 claw to dissolve you for 3d4 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d10 damage.  

The Law drake  (Light Blue 'D')
=== Num:340  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:473  Ac:70  Exp:640
This dragon is clever and cunning.  It laughs at your puny efforts to disturb
 it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 2618.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe sound or shards powerfully; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, 
 confuse or slow powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed
 , slept or cut.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to 
 batter you for 2d6 damage, claw to batter you for 2d6 damage and bite to hurt 
 you for 2d12 damage.  

The Night giant  (Deep Light Blue 'P')
=== Num:1029  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:352  Ac:60  Exp:640
It is a twenty foot tall giant dark as night.  This evil giant is normally
 found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal speed, but is older, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2618.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to blind you for 4d10 damage, doubled
 against eye monsters; 1 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 produce poison balls, blink-self or create darkness; 1 time in 16.  It can 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is immune to poison.  It
 resists darkness.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry a chest, musical item, potion, edible item or treasure
 .  It can hit to hurt you for 8d8 damage and hit to hurt and poison you for
 10d8 damage.  

The Hell bat  (Red 'b')
=== Num:734  Lev:35  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:221  Ac:40  Exp:650
It is a giant bat that glows with heat. Flames shoot from its wings.  This evil
animal is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves somewhat erratically and
 very quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 2659.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength and fly over obstacles.  It is immune to fire.  It
 is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 80 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It can bite to burn you for 3d12 damage, bite to 
 burn you for 3d12 damage and bite to burn you for 3d12 damage.  

The Pukelm|an|an|en|  (Light Dark 'g')
=== Num:276  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:437  Ac:80  Exp:700
A stumpy figure carved from stone, with glittering eyes, this sentinel strides
 towards you with deadly intent.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 35 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 2863.64 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which produce acid bolts, confuse or slow; 1 time in 4
 .  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold
 , poison and edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120
 feet.  It can hit to batter you for 1d12 damage and hit to batter you for 3d6 
 damage.  

The Black pudding  (Violet 'j')
=== Num:398  Lev:35  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:386  Ac:18  Exp:700
A lump of rotting black flesh that slurrrrrrrps across the dungeon floor.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2863.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may 
 spray to dissolve you; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength, pick up objects, leave a trail behind it and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It may carry up to 4 adornments, potions, junk items or 
 treasures.  It can touch to dissolve you for 3d13 damage and spray to dissolve
you.  

The Skeleton troll  (Light Teal 's')
=== Num:338  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:405  Ac:50  Exp:720
It is the animated form of a massive troll.  This evil undead troll is normally
 found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 2945.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d14 damage, hit to hurt
you for 2d14 damage and bite to wound you for 1d18 damage.  

The Necromancer  (Purple 'q')
=== Num:391  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:900  Ac:50  Exp:750
A gaunt figure, clothed in black robes.  This evil woman mage is normally found 
 on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3068.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which invoke darkness storms, produce nether bolts, 
 produce mana bolts, haste-self, recover mana, blink-self, create a shield, 
 summon an undead, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  She can carry a
 lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  
 She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  
 She may carry one or two weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical devices
 , written items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for 1d9 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 1d9 damage.  

The Rotting horror  (White 'H')
=== Num:1283  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:345  Ac:90  Exp:750
A ghastly undead hybrid of all things that walk, crawl and swim, but mostly
 those that rot and seep fluids.  This evil undead animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 3068.18 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, swim under water and track you
 over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It can claw to wound you for 2d14 damage, vomit to 
 cover you in blood for 2d12 damage, touch to poison you for 2d12 damage and 
 crush to drain life from you for 4d10 damage.  

The Manticore  (Yellow 'H')
=== Num:321  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:243  Ac:15  Exp:760
A great man-faced red lion with a lashing spiked tail.  The weak-minded he
 lulls with song; the strong he slays with poisoned barbs.  This evil creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster
 , more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 3109.09 points for a 1st level character.  He is dangerous at his
 native depth.  He may create a spike to hurt and poison you and may grow
 ammunition; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells which slow; 1 time
 in 3.  He can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but
 not through water.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 120 feet.  He may carry a exceptional treasure.  He can bite to wound you
for 3d13 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 2d13 damage.  

The Plasma vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Light Red 'v')
=== Num:401  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:162  Ac:40  Exp:760
A whirlpool of intense flame, charring the stones at your feet.  This creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves extremely erratically and
 quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 3109.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.   and may breathe plasma; 1 time in 2.  It can bash down
 doors and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, 
 fire and blunt weapons.  It resists plasma and blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can envelope to blast you with plasma 
 for 8d8 damage.  

The Plasma hound  (Light Red 'Z')
=== Num:487  Lev:35  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:264  Ac:100  Exp:760
The very air warps as pure elemental energy stalks towards you in the shape of
 a giant hound.  Your hair stands on end and your palms itch as you sense
 trouble.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly,
 but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3109.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may
 breathe plasma; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and track you unerringly
 over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning and fire.  It
 resists plasma.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in
 groups.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage.


The Water elemental  (Blue 'E')
=== Num:351  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:104  Ac:40  Exp:770
It is a towering tempest of water.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 35 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 3150.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce storm
 balls, produce frost bolts, produce water bolts or recover mana; 1 time in 5.  
 It can bash down doors and swim under water.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by water remover.  It is immune to acid, 
 fire, cold and poison.  It resists water, blindness and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to batter you for
 1d10 damage, hit to batter you for 1d10 damage and envelope to batter you for
 10d1 damage.  

The Lich|||es|  (Orange 'L')
=== Num:356  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:264  Ac:60  Exp:770
It is a skeletal form dressed in robes.  It radiates vastly evil power.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 3150.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which recover mana, blink-self, teleport to, teleport away, drain mana, curse
 you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, 
 terrify, blind, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash
 down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to 
 lightning, cold and poison.  It resists edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, adornments, magical devices, 
 written items or treasures.  It can touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from 
 you, touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 2d8 damage and touch to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 2d8 damage.  

The Colbran  (Yellow 'g')
=== Num:300  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:437  Ac:80  Exp:790
A man-shaped form of living lightning, sparks and shocks crackle all over this
 madly capering figure, as it leaps and whirls around and about you.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 3231.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce lightning
 bolts or produce lightening beams; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning
 and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit 
 to electrify you for 3d8 damage and hit to electrify you for 3d8 damage.  

The Hell hound  (Red 'C')
=== Num:361  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:336  Ac:80  Exp:820
It is a giant dog that glows with heat.  Flames pour from its nostrils.  This
 evil mix of animal and demon is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves a
 bit erratically and quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 3354.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time
 in 5.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It
 resists lava, plasma, magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands
 .  It takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.
It can bite to burn you for 3d12 damage, bite to burn you for 3d12 damage and 
 bite to burn you for 3d12 damage.  

The Balance drake  (Violet 'D')
=== Num:341  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:516  Ac:70  Exp:830
A mighty dragon, the balance drake seeks to maintain the Cosmic Balance, and
 despises your feeble efforts to destroy evil.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 35 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3395.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may breathe sound, shards, chaos or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 5 and
 is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to fire and cold.  It resists disenchantment and chaos.  It cannot
 be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, armours or 
 adornments.  It can claw to batter you for 2d6 damage, claw to batter you for
 2d6 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Trapper  (White '^')
=== Num:388  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:510  Ac:75  Exp:830
A larger cousin of the lurker, this creature traps unsuspecting victims and
 paralyzes them, to be slowly digested later.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 3395.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may trap to hurt you for 4d17 damage; 1 time in 6.  
 It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can trap to hurt you for
 4d17 damage and hit to paralyze you for 40d2 damage.  

The Giant chieftain||ess|s|  (Light Violet 'P')
=== Num:1211  Lev:35  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:491  Ac:30  Exp:840
A great battle-lord of Horodwaith, twenty-five feet tall, who wields a massive
 two-handed sword that strikes like a bolt of lightning.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3436.36
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you or throw a boulder at to deafen you; 1
 time in 10 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 lightning balls, produce lightening beams, teleport to or terrify; 1 time in 10
 .  She can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She is immune to 
 lightning.  She tends to overlook intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She may carry up to 3 chests, 
 missile weapons, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can 
 hit to electrify you for 8d9 damage and crush to hurt you for 6d3 damage.  

[U] Ulbandi, the Ogre Chieftain  (Violet 'O')
=== Num:297  Lev:35  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1200  Ac:100  Exp:4900
An ogre renowned for acts of surpassing cruelty, Ulbandi quickly became the
 leader of a large band of violent ogres.  This evil giant is normally found on
 dungeon level 35 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 20045.45
 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He can 
 open doors, bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  
 He is immune to poison.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may
 notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 3
 good chests, weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items or junk items.  
 He can hit to batter you for 6d6 damage, hit to batter you for 6d6 damage and 
 hit to batter you for 6d6 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

[U] Blodrin the Traitor  (Orange 'l')
=== Num:636  Lev:35  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:924  Ac:80  Exp:7100
Son of Bor, and an Elf from Turin's Band of Outlaws.  He lusts only for blood
 and gold, caring nothing about those he robs of riches and life.  This evil 
 elf is normally found on dungeon level 35 and moves quickly.  Killing this
 creature is worth 29045.45 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at
 his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells which produce acid balls, 
 produce acid bolts, heal-self or terrify; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors and 
 bash down doors.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while to see intruders,
 which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 3 exceptional weapons, 
 missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, written items, musical items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 3d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage and hit to disenchant your
 armour and weapons.  

The Unmagic worm mass|||es|  (Light Dark 'w')
=== Num:1213  Lev:36  Rar:6  Spd:+5  Hp:79  Ac:9  Exp:310
A writhing wormlike shimmer of blackness, large as your arm.  It sucks in magic
 and spews it out again.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 36 and
 moves extremely erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 1296.36 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe mana; 1 time in 10.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is rarely detected
 by telepathy.  It breeds explosively.  It resists disenchantment, blindness, 
 darkness, magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot
 be frightened.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 100 feet.  It can crawl to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 1d5 
 damage and crawl to disenchant your armour and weapons for 1d5 damage.  

The Night-drake  (Deep Light Blue 'D')
=== Num:1204  Lev:36  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:272  Ac:25  Exp:480
A draconic form with fire-red eyes that glare out of the Night.  It is
 surrounded by an aura of unearthly cold that chills the soul rather than the
 body.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves at
 normal speed, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 2007.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 challenging at its native depth.  It may breathe nether powerfully; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which create darkness, 
 terrify or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5
 .  It can bash down doors, pass through walls and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is invisible.  It is immune to cold.  It resists darkness.  
 It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, 
 armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 2d4 damage and bite to drain experience (by 10d6+) from you for 3d4 
 damage.  

The Vrock  (Purple 'U')
=== Num:447  Lev:36  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:360  Ac:50  Exp:820
It is a demon with a long neck and raking claws.  This evil demon is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 3429.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  
 It is magical, casting spells which blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 6.  It can open doors and bash down doors.
It is immune to acid, lightning and fire.  It resists magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 usually appears in groups.  It may carry a weapon, armour or written item.  It
 can claw to wound you for 8d12 damage and claw to wound you for 8d12 damage.  

The Mature diamond dragon  (White 'D')
=== Num:781  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:557  Ac:65  Exp:820
A large dragon, scales gleaming a clear diamond.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 3429.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe frost or mana powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It resists magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt 
 you for 2d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for
 4d12 damage.  

The Mature emerald dragon  (Green 'D')
=== Num:782  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:557  Ac:65  Exp:820
A large dragon, scales gleaming a deep emerald.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 3429.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is challenging at its
 native depth.  It may breathe poison or force powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 
 chests, armours, adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage.


The Mature garnet dragon  (Light Red 'D')
=== Num:1232  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:557  Ac:65  Exp:860
A large dragon, scales gleaming a pure garnet.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 3596.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe disease powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is cold blooded.  It resists teleportation.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to 
 hurt you for 2d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt 
 you for 4d12 damage.  

The Copper golem  (Light Umber 'g')
=== Num:828  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:-5  Hp:288  Ac:100  Exp:880
It is a massive copper statue of weird geometric shapes that moves steadily
 towards you.  Sparks shoot from coils and wires atop its three legged body.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves slowly, but is 
 larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 3680.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.   and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 lightening beams; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold, 
 poison and edged weapons.  It resists blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It may carry up to 9 precious metals.  It can hit to 
 hurt you for 2d7 damage.  

The Howling spirit  (Teal 'G')
=== Num:868  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:61  Ac:20  Exp:900
A ghostly apparition that howls horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 3763.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may howl to reduce wisdom
 from you; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which teleport-self
 or summon hounds; 1 time in 6.  It can pass through walls and fly over
 obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold and 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 140 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can touch
to reduce strength and size from you for 1d10 damage, touch to reduce strength
 and size from you for 1d10 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d6 damage and howl to
reduce wisdom from you.  

The Lost  (Blue Slate 'M')
=== Num:311  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:346  Ac:68  Exp:910
A Maia who strayed early from the song and never heard the evil strains that
 Melkor imposed on the world. He is angry at the twisting of magic that he
 senses, but like an unknowing child, lashes out at all around him.  This mix of
elf and demon is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 3805.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to terrify you 
 for 1d4 damage; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce mana bolts, produce holy orbs, haste-self, recover mana, 
 teleport-self to, cause mind blasting, summon a monster, terrify or blind
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is immune to acid, lightning and 
 poison.  It resists magical spells, the effects of rods, staffs and wands and 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It prefers to ignore
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 weapons, 
 armours or written items.  It can gaze to terrify you for 1d4 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 3d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d6 damage and hit to hurt you 
 for 3d6 damage.  

The Smoke elemental  (Slate 'E')
=== Num:371  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:69  Ac:80  Exp:910
It is a towering blackened form, crackling with heat.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves very quickly, but is larger, 
 faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 3805.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  ; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 fire bolts, recover mana or create darkness; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors and fly over obstacles.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune
 to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness and blunt weapons.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention
 to intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can envelope to hurt you 
 for 2d6 damage and envelope to hurt you for 2d6 damage.  

The Blizzard giant  (Light Blue 'P')
=== Num:1218  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:698  Ac:30  Exp:910
From snow-capped peaks come the lords of endless frost, the Mountain-Gargantua,
 whose blows are avalanches.  This evil giant is normally found on dungeon
 level 36 and moves quickly, but is older, more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3805.45 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce frost balls; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is immune to cold.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 5 chests, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  It can hit to 
 freeze you for 6d10 damage and hit to batter you for 3d10 damage.  

The Time hound  (Light Blue 'Z')
=== Num:486  Lev:36  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:264  Ac:100  Exp:920
You get a terrible sense of deja vu, or is it a premonition?  All at once you
 see a little puppy and a toothless old dog.  Perhaps you should give up and go
 to bed.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves very
 quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 3847.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native
 depth.  It may breathe time; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and track
 you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Hateful soul  (Light Dark 'G')
=== Num:856  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:81  Ac:20  Exp:930
It hates you with a malice.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 36 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 3889.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which teleport-self, drain
 mana, incur beserk rage, blind, confuse or slow; 1 time in 4.  It can pass
 through walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 160 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical
 items, junk items or treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d4 damage, hit to
hurt you for 3d4 damage and hit to reduce intelligence from you for 1d3 damage.


The Minotaur  (Slate 'H')
=== Num:441  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:262  Ac:25  Exp:940
It is a cross between a human and a bull.  This evil creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 36 and moves very quickly, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 3930.91
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may lash to hurt you for 4d6 damage; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 130 feet.  It may carry a good treasure.  
 It can trample to hurt you for 4d6 damage, trample to hurt you for 4d6 damage, 
 hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage and lash to hurt you for 4d6 damage.  

The 5-headed hydra  (Green 'y')
=== Num:302  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:378  Ac:80  Exp:1000
A strange reptilian hybrid with five heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 36 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 4181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe frost; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells which produce frost balls or terrify; 1 time in 5
 .  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you
 over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  
 It resists blindness.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 treasures.  It can bite to freeze you for
 4d4 damage, bite to freeze you for 4d4 damage, bite to freeze you for 4d4 
 damage and bite to freeze you for 4d4 damage.  

The Ooze elemental  (Green 'E')
=== Num:370  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:185  Ac:80  Exp:1000
It is a towering mass of filth, an eyesore of ooze.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 4181.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  ; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce acid balls, 
 produce acid bolts or recover mana; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, ooze
 through tiny cracks and dig through earth and rubble.  It is cold blooded.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  
 It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 can touch to dissolve you for 2d21 damage.  

The Mature amethyst dragon  (Violet 'D')
=== Num:780  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:557  Ac:65  Exp:1000
A large dragon, scales gleaming a deep amethyst.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 4181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe acid or time powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to acid.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 
 chests, armours, adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage.


The Mature sapphire dragon  (Blue 'D')
=== Num:783  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:557  Ac:65  Exp:1000
A large dragon, scales gleaming a deep sapphire.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 4181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe lightning or gravity powerfully; 1 time in 5 and
 is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to lightning.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 
 chests, armours, adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage.


The Mature ruby dragon  (Red 'D')
=== Num:784  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:557  Ac:65  Exp:1000
A large dragon, scales gleaming a deep ruby.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 4181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe fire or inertia powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 
 chests, armours, adornments or gem stones.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage.


The Living tornado  (Umber '~')
=== Num:1216  Lev:36  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:194  Ac:60  Exp:1000
An intense storm, churning and roiling, powerful enough to pick up trees and
 drive them through walls.  It holds missiles of every sort, and will gladly
 fling them at you.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 36 and
 moves extremely erratically and very quickly, but is larger or faster deeper
 in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 4181.82 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may throw a
 boulder at to hurt you for 13d6 damage or create a spike to hurt you for 21d5 
 damage and may breathe shards, wind or force; 1 time in 2 and is also magical,
 casting spells which produce cone of force or recover mana; 1 time in 2.  It
 can bash down doors, pick up objects, fly over obstacles and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It regenerates quickly.  It resists water, blindness, chaos, edged
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept
 or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 150 feet.
It usually appears with a friend.  It may carry up to 9 junk items or treasures
 .  It can envelope to hurt you for 10d3 damage.  

The Ghost  (White 'G')
=== Num:326  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:55  Ac:30  Exp:1100
You don't believe in it.  But it believes in you...  This evil undead creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves a bit erratically and quickly,
 but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 4600.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may wail to terrify you; 1 time in 16 and
 is also magical, casting spells which drain mana, blind or paralyze; 1 time in
 16.  It can pass through walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 garments, 
 tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can wail to terrify you, 
 touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you, claw to reduce intelligence from
you for 1d6 damage and claw to reduce wisdom from you for 1d6 damage.  

The Fire elemental  (Red 'E')
=== Num:349  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:122  Ac:50  Exp:1100
It is a towering inferno of flames.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 36 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 4600.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire
 bolts, produce cone of hellfire or recover mana; 1 time in 5.  It can bash
 down doors.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is not detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to acid, lightning, fire and poison.  It resists lava, blindness
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to
burn you for 4d6 damage and envelope to burn you for 4d6 damage.  

The Coal golem  (Light Dark 'g')
=== Num:832  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:-5  Hp:437  Ac:80  Exp:1100
It is a massive coal-powered statue that moves steadily towards you.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves slowly, but is larger
 , faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 4600.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.   and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts
 or create darkness; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to 
 lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage and hit to hurt 
 you for 1d12 damage.  

The Whispering spirit  (Slate 'G')
=== Num:869  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:65  Ac:20  Exp:1100
A ghostly apparition that whispers horribly.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 4600.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which teleport-self or summon an undead; 1 time in 6.  It can pass through
 walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 140 feet.  It may carry up to 3 garments, tools, musical items, junk items or 
 treasures.  It can touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 1d12 
 damage, touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 1d12 damage and 
 touch to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 1d12 damage.  

The Nightworm  (Green 'N')
=== Num:991  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:288  Ac:100  Exp:1100
It has escaped from the blackest pits of night, squirming its way up  on a
 fecund trail of noxious slime. Dark, undead eyes gleam from a distended 
 shapeless mass whose uppermost tip paradies a mockery of a face, twisted  in
 unlife. Death awaits you.  This evil undead insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 36 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 4600.00 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe nether;
 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 nether bolts, summon an undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can bash
 down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to 
 cold and poison.  It resists water, nether, nexus, disenchantment and darkness
 .  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry one or two armours
 , adornments or written items.  It can touch to dissolve you for 2d5 damage, 
 touch to dissolve you for 2d5 damage, crawl to disenchant your armour and
 weapons for 4d6 damage and crawl to disenchant your armour and weapons for 4d6 
 damage.  

The Auto-roller  (Slate 'g')
=== Num:1364  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:383  Ac:80  Exp:1100
It looks like a huge spiked roller, moving on its own towards you.   This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 4600.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison, edged
 and blunt weapons.  It resists teleportation.  It cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed, slept, cut, slowed or paralyzed.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can crush to 
 hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Castigant  (Light Umber 's')
=== Num:526  Lev:36  Rar:3  Spd:+5  Hp:367  Ac:55  Exp:1200
A skeletal form, which conjures forth demons from beyond...  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 5018.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  ; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce fire bolts, recover mana, blink-self, curse you, cause wounds or 
 summon a demon; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, bash down doors and pick up
 objects.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists blindness
 and edged weapons.  It cannot be cut.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry one or two weapons
 , armours, adornments or treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 6d5 damage and 
 touch to drain mana from you for 3d5 damage, plus spell points.  

[U] Lorgan, Chief of the Easterlings  (Magenta-Pink 'q')
=== Num:392  Lev:36  Rar:8  Spd:+10  Hp:1440  Ac:100  Exp:25000
A mighty warrior from the east, Lorgan hates everything that he cannot control.
This evil man is normally found on dungeon level 36 and moves quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 104545.45 points for a 1st level character.  He is over
 powered at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells which teleport to
 or summon monsters; 1 time in 4.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors
 and bash down doors.  He needs lite to see you.  He is immune to acid, 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 250 feet.  He
 may carry up to 3 good weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical devices, 
 written items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage
 , hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d56 damage and hit to 
 hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

The Ice elemental  (White 'E')
=== Num:390  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:218  Ac:60  Exp:1200
It is a towering glacier of ice.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 37 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 5127.27 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  ; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells which produce frost balls, produce ice bolts or 
 recover mana; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It
 is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, cold and 
 poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 100
 feet.  It can touch to freeze you for 4d9 damage and hit to cover you with ice
for 4d6 damage.  

The 6-headed hydra  (Purple 'y')
=== Num:1069  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:415  Ac:85  Exp:1200
A strange reptilian hybrid with six heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 37 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 5127.27 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It may spit to blind you for 1d2 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters and may breathe poison; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce poison balls or terrify; 1 time in 5.  
 It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to poison.  It resists blindness.  
 It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 4 treasures.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 3d7 damage, 
 bite to hurt and poison you for 3d7 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for
 3d7 damage and spit to blind you for 1d2 damage, doubled against eye monsters.


The Assassin  (Violet 'p')
=== Num:1215  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:418  Ac:25  Exp:1200
She hunts you down patiently, ready with her poison-tipped blades.  This evil 
 woman is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves quickly, but is older or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 5127.27
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 may create a dart to poison you; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce poison bolts, haste-self, give invisibility
 , create darkness, terrify, blind or slow; 1 time in 3.  She can open doors, 
 bash down doors and pick up objects.  She is rarely detected by telepathy.  
 She is immune to poison.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is
 fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 250 feet.  She may
 carry up to 5 weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, 
 potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt and poison you for
 3d12 damage, hit to blind you for 2d12 damage, doubled against eye monsters
 and hit to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Acidic cytoplasm  (Purple 'j')
=== Num:366  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:386  Ac:18  Exp:1300
A disgusting animated blob of destruction.  Flee its gruesome hunger!  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 5554.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, pick up objects and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 is vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry up
 to 6 adornments, potions, junk items or treasures.  It can touch to dissolve 
 you for 3d15 damage.  

The Emperor wight  (Red 'W')
=== Num:414  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:350  Ac:40  Exp:1300
Your life force is torn from your body as this powerful unearthly being
 approaches.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 37
 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 5554.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which produce nether bolts, curse you, cause wounds, terrify or paralyze; 1
 time in 5.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists darkness.  
 It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, armours, 
 garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  It can hit to paralyze you 
 for 1d12 damage, hit to blind you for 1d12 damage, doubled against eye monsters
 , touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you and touch to drain experience
 (by 80d6+) from you.  

The Black wraith  (Light Dark 'W')
=== Num:417  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:445  Ac:55  Exp:1300
A figure that seems made of void, its strangely human shape is cloaked in
 shadow.  It reaches out at you.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 37 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 5554.55 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells which produce frost bolts, produce nether bolts, incur
 wraithform, cause wounds, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 6.  It can 
 open doors, bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It
 is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists 
 darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, 
 armours, garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  It can hit to hurt
you for 1d12 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage, touch to drain experience
 (by 40d6+) from you and touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you.  

The Horde mumak  (Light Slate 'Q')
=== Num:461  Lev:37  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:665  Ac:30  Exp:1300
A gigantic elephant, maddened by Southron war-drugs.  Its tusks are capped with
 steel, and on it ride the fearsome crossbowmen of Harad.  This evil mix of man
 and animal is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves a bit erratically
 and quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 5554.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may create a crossbow bolt to hurt you; 1 time in 3 and is also
 magical, casting spells which incur beserk rage or summon monsters of the same
 class; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 180 feet.  It usually appears with a
 friend.  It can trample to hurt you for 4d8 damage and crush to hurt you for
 4d15 damage.  

The Grave lich|||es|  (Umber 'L')
=== Num:961  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:437  Ac:63  Exp:1300
It is a skeletal form dressed in robes.  It radiates vastly evil power.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 5554.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which blink-self, teleport to, teleport away, drain mana, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, summon an undead, terrify, 
 blind, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to lightning, 
 cold and poison.  It resists nether and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 garments, adornments, magical devices, written
 items or treasures.  It can touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you, 
 touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 2d9 damage and touch to reduce dexterity and agility
 from you for 2d9 damage.  

The Death knight  (Light Dark 't')
=== Num:407  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:480  Ac:100  Exp:1400
It is a humanoid figure dressed in armour of an ancient form.  From beneath its
 helmet, eyes glow a baleful red and seem to pierce you like lances of fire.  
 This evil undead man warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 37 and
 moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 5981.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce nether bolts, teleport-self to, cause wounds, 
 incur heroism, summon monsters, terrify or blind; 1 time in 5.  It can open
 doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to fire.  It
 resists nether and darkness.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, garments, tools, 
 lites, adornments, musical items, potions or edible items.  It can hit to 
 drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 6d6 damage, hit to wound you for 5d5 
 damage and hit to wound you for 5d5 damage.  

The Crystal dragon  (Light Pink 'D')
=== Num:446  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:448  Ac:100  Exp:1400
A huge crystalline dragon.  Its claws could cut you to shreds and its teeth are
 razor sharp.  Strange colours ripple through it as it moves in the light.  
 This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves quickly, but
 is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 5981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may create a spike to wound you for 26d5 damage and may grow
 ammunition and may breathe shards powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 immune to cold.  It resists edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from
 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to
wound you for 6d2 damage, claw to wound you for 6d2 damage and bite to wound 
 you for 12d3 damage.  

The Death quasit  (Light Dark 'u')
=== Num:448  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:370  Ac:80  Exp:1400
It is a demon of small stature, but its armoured frame moves with lightning
 speed and its powers make it a tornado of death and destruction.  This evil 
 demon is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves very quickly, but is 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 5981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which give invisibility, 
 incur wraithform, cause wounds, summon a demon, cause amnesia, terrify, blind
 or confuse; 1 time in 10.  It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 weapons, armours or 
 written items.  It can bite to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 3d6 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage and claw to hurt you for 3d3 damage.  

The Lead golem  (Blue Slate 'g')
=== Num:488  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:-5  Hp:370  Ac:80  Exp:1400
It is a massive lead statue that moves steadily towards you, draining magic
 from the air around it.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 37
 and moves slowly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 5981.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  .  It can bash down doors.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, 
 lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It resists magical spells, 
 the effects of rods, staffs and wands and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d10 damage, 
 hit to hurt you for 3d10 damage and touch to remove enchantments from you.  

The Eye druj|||es|  (Light Pink 's')
=== Num:500  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:1400
A bloodshot eyeball floating in the air, you'd be forgiven for assuming it
 harmless.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 37 and
 moves very quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not
 deign to chase intruders.  Destruction of this creature is worth 5981.82 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce nether balls, produce
 nether bolts, produce mana bolts, cause mind blasting or summon an undead; 1
 time in 1.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to fire, cold and poison.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Steel golem  (White 'g')
=== Num:827  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:-5  Hp:444  Ac:130  Exp:1400
It is a massive steel statue of a rivetted armoured figure that moves steadily
 towards you.  A port open in its chest reveals the muzzle of a great cannon.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves slowly, but is 
 larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 5981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may create a shot to batter you; 1 time in 10.  It
 can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  
 It is immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It resists 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can hit 
 to hurt you for 2d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d10 damage and hit to hurt 
 you for 2d10 damage.  

The Dreadful soul  (Orange 'G')
=== Num:857  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:108  Ac:20  Exp:1400
It is hideous and barely there.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 37 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 5981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which teleport-self, drain
 mana, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can pass through walls, 
 pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 160
 feet.  It may carry up to 3 garments, tools, musical items, junk items or 
 treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d5 
 damage and hit to reduce strength and size from you for 2d2 damage.  

The Mummified priest  (Light Blue 'z')
=== Num:1104  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:695  Ac:70  Exp:1400
The wrappings on this mummy are well maintained, and are decorated with many
 unholy hieroglyphics.  This evil undead priest is normally found on dungeon
 level 37 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 5981.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which heal-self, curse you, cause wounds, incur heroism, summon
 similar monsters, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash
 down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry one or two weapons, armours, adornments, magical devices or 
 treasures.  It can hit to infect you with disease for 2d8 damage, hit to 
 infect you with disease for 2d8 damage and touch to reduce intelligence from 
 you for 2d5 damage.  

The |Patriarch|Matriarch|Hierarchs|  (Blue 'p')
=== Num:1220  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:819  Ac:35  Exp:1500
A dark priest of the highest order.  Powerful and evil, beware her many spells.
This evil woman priest is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves quickly,
 but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 6409.09 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 balls of light, haste-self, recover mana, heal-self, cure-self, blink-self, 
 curse you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, incur heroism, summon monsters, 
 summon an undead, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  She can open doors
 and bash down doors.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She takes a
 while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up
 to 4 weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, potions, 
 edible items or treasures.  She can hit to hurt you for 3d7 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 3d7 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d7 damage.  

The Mature multi-hued dragon  (Violet 'D')
=== Num:406  Lev:37  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:504  Ac:80  Exp:1600
A large dragon, scales shimmering many colours and shades.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves at normal speed.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 6836.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost or poison
 powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance;
 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and 
 poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage.  

The Troll Clan Chief  (Light Purple 'T')
=== Num:1061  Lev:37  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:810  Ac:50  Exp:1600
This troll is Clan Chief: although she's still stupid, she is bigger, tougher 
 and stronger than most other trolls.  This evil troll is normally found on
 dungeon level 37 and moves quickly, but is larger, older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 6836.36 points for a
 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She can open doors
 , bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, pick up objects and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  She is immune to poison.  She
 takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She
 usually appears with escorts.  She may carry one or two chests, weapons, 
 garments, edible items, junk items or treasures.  She can hit to batter you 
 for 2d12 damage, hit to batter you for 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 3d6 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d6 damage.  

The Blade of slaughter  (Red '|')
=== Num:1210  Lev:37  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:307  Ac:35  Exp:1600
A blade with no wielder you can see, slaughtering where it will.  It is utterly
 untamable:  destroy it, flee, or die.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 37 and moves very quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 6836.36 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which teleport-self to; 1 time in 7.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists water, nether, nexus, blindness and chaos.  It cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 170 feet.  It may carry a special object or treasure.  It
 can hit to wound you for 6d6 damage and hit to wound you for 6d6 damage.  

[U] Maedhros, Son of Feanor  (Light Pink 'l')
=== Num:1148  Lev:37  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:778  Ac:68  Exp:6800
The eldest, and strongest of the seven sons, he took the Oath of Feanor with
 his father and brothers.  For years he and his brothers guarded the passages in
 the east into Beleriand. He was captured and tortured by Morgoth after his
 father's death. He was corrupted by his desire for the three Silmarils.  This
 evil elf is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 29054.55 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 deadly at his native depth.  He may create an arrow to hurt you for 28d6 
 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 haste-self, heal-self, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors, bash down doors and pick up
 objects.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He prefers to ignore intruders, which he may notice from
 300 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites
 , adornments, written items, musical items, potions or edible items.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 9d10 damage and hit to hurt you for 9d10 damage.  

[U] Rogrog the Black Troll  (Light Dark 'T')
=== Num:383  Lev:37  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:1720  Ac:70  Exp:9900
A massive and cruel troll of great power, drool slides caustically down his
 muscular frame.  Despite his bulk, he strikes with stunning speed.  This evil 
 troll is normally found on dungeon level 37 and moves quickly.  Killing this
 creature is worth 42300.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at
 his native depth.  He may spit to dissolve you for 4d8 damage or throw a
 boulder at to hurt you for 24d10 damage; 1 time in 6.  He can open doors, bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, pick up objects and track you
 over land, but not through water.  He is immune to cold and poison.  He tends
 to overlook intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears
 with escorts.  He may carry up to 3 good chests, weapons, garments, edible
 items or junk items.  He can hit to batter you for 12d7 damage, bite to wound 
 you for 4d10 damage and spit to dissolve you for 4d8 damage.  

The Ethereal drake  (Light Violet 'D')
=== Num:342  Lev:38  Rar:2  Spd:+0  Hp:430  Ac:70  Exp:570
A dragon of great power, with control over light and dark, the ethereal drake's
 eyes glare with white hatred from the shadows.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 38 and moves at normal speed, but is larger or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 2487.27
 points for a 1st level character.  It is threatening at its native depth.  It
 may breathe light or darkness powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can pass through walls, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is invisible.  It resists lite and darkness.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d4 damage and bite 
 to hurt you for 3d6 damage.  

The Air elemental  (Light Green 'E')
=== Num:360  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:81  Ac:50  Exp:1600
It is a towering tornado of winds.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 38 and moves a bit erratically and very quickly, but is larger or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 6981.82
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  ; 1
 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which produce lightning balls, 
 produce lightning bolts, produce cone of force or recover mana; 1 time in 6.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and easily evade blows and missiles
 .  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid
 , lightning, cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It resists blindness.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It can envelope to confuse you for 3d12 
 damage.  

The 7-headed hydra  (Red 'y')
=== Num:426  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:451  Ac:90  Exp:1600
A strange reptilian hybrid with seven heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 38 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 6981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, produce fire bolts or 
 terrify; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire
 .  It resists blindness.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 treasures.  It can bite to burn 
 you for 3d9 damage, bite to burn you for 3d9 damage, bite to burn you for 3d9 
 damage and bite to burn you for 3d9 damage.  

The Chaos vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Light Purple 'v')
=== Num:502  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+30  Hp:265  Ac:80  Exp:1700
Void, nothingness, spinning destructively.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 38 and moves extremely erratically and incredibly quickly, but
 is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is
 worth 7418.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.   and may breathe chaos powerfully; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors
 and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It resists blindness and chaos.  It cannot be frightened, confused
 , charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice
 from 1000 feet.  It can envelope to blast you with chaos for 7d5 damage, 
 envelope to blast you with chaos for 7d5 damage and envelope to space out you 
 for 6d5 damage.  

The Magma hound  (Orange 'Z')
=== Num:537  Lev:38  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:336  Ac:80  Exp:1700
It is a giant dog that glows with heat.  Flames pour from its nostrils.  This
 evil animal is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves a bit erratically
 and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 7418.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, pass
 through walls and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to fire.  It resists lava and plasma.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  
 It can bite to burn you for 3d12 damage and bite to burn you for 3d12 damage.  
 

[U] the Death knight from the Mountains  (Light Dark 't')
=== Num:604  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:480  Ac:100  Exp:1700
It is a humanoid figure dressed in armour of an ancient form.  From beneath its
 helmet, eyes glow a baleful red and seem to pierce you like lances of fire.  
 This evil undead man warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 38 and
 moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destroying this creature is worth 7418.18 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is challenging at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce nether bolts, teleport-self to, cause wounds, 
 incur heroism, summon monsters, terrify or blind; 1 time in 5.  It can open
 doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to fire.  It
 resists nether and darkness.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it
 may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, garments, tools, 
 lites, adornments, musical items, potions or edible items.  It can hit to 
 wound you for 6d6 damage, hit to wound you for 5d5 damage and hit to wound you
for 5d5 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Greater mummy  (Light Teal 'z')
=== Num:615  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:294  Ac:68  Exp:1700
Once a powerful ruler, now an even more powerful undead menace.  This evil
 undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves at normal speed
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 7418.18 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to drain 
 experience (by 40d6+) from you for 3d4 damage or gaze to terrify you for 3d4 
 damage; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce frost balls, produce poison balls, produce nether bolts, haste-self, 
 heal-self, create darkness, drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, 
 summon an undead, cause amnesia, terrify or blind; 1 time in 3.  It can open
 doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to acid, lightning, cold and poison.  It cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It prefers to ignore intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It usually appears with escorts.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, 
 armours, adornments or magical devices.  It can claw to reduce constitution
 from you for 3d6 damage, claw to reduce constitution from you for 3d6 damage, 
 gaze to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 3d4 damage and gaze to 
 terrify you for 3d4 damage.  

The Crypt lich|||es|  (Light Umber 'L')
=== Num:962  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+0  Hp:608  Ac:66  Exp:1700
It is a skeletal form dressed in robes.  It radiates vastly evil power.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 7418.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which blink-self, teleport to, teleport away, drain mana, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, terrify, blind, slow or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to lightning, cold and 
 poison.  It resists nether and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed
 or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 3 garments, adornments, magical devices, written items or 
 treasures.  It can touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you, touch to 
 drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and
 agility from you for 2d10 damage and touch to reduce dexterity and agility from
you for 2d10 damage.  

The Skull druj|||es|  (Orange 's')
=== Num:501  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+20  Hp:1064  Ac:120  Exp:1800
A glowing skull possessed by sorcerous power.  It need not move, but merely
 blast you with mighty magic as it speaks the words of power.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves very quickly, but is 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 7854.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce plasma bolts, produce nether bolts, produce water
 bolts, produce mana bolts, create traps, curse you, cause mind blasting, cause
 wounds, summon an undead or slow; 1 time in 1.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It has no physical attacks.  

The Brass golem  (Orange 'g')
=== Num:829  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:-5  Hp:384  Ac:100  Exp:1800
It is a massive brass statue of a mishapen figure that moves steadily towards
 you.  Acid leaks from a multitude of pipes in its body.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves slowly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 7854.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.   and is also magical, casting spells which produce acid balls or 
 produce acid bolts; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.
It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold, 
 poison and edged weapons.  It resists disenchantment and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry up to 9 precious
 metals.  It can hit to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Apparition  (Light Teal 'G')
=== Num:842  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:92  Ac:30  Exp:1800
It looks real but appearances are deceiving.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but
 is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 7854.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may wail to terrify you; 1 time in 10 and is also
 magical, casting spells which drain mana, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time
 in 10.  It can pass through walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot
 be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 garments, 
 tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can wail to terrify you, 
 touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you and claw to reduce intelligence
 from you for 4d4 damage.  

The Crystal vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Light Pink 'v')
=== Num:1253  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:194  Ac:60  Exp:1800
A thundering, grinding, churning vortex of razor-sharp rubble that tears
 through the dungeon leaving a ruined jumble of rock in its wake.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves extremely erratically
 and quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 7854.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 13d6 
 damage or create a spike to hurt you for 21d5 damage and may grow ammunition
 or create earthquakes and may breathe shards; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down
 doors, bore through walls and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  
 It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It resists water, 
 blindness, chaos and edged weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it
 may notice from 150 feet.  It may carry up to 9 treasures.  It can envelope to
shatter you for 10d10 damage.  

The Ancient blue dragon  (Blue 'A')
=== Num:411  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:591  Ac:90  Exp:1900
A huge draconic form.  Lightning crackles along its length.  This evil dragon
 is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 8290.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may breathe lightning powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind, confuse or 
 slow powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash
 down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.
It is immune to lightning.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for
 4d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d8 damage and bite to electrify you for 7d8 
 damage.  

The Ancient bronze dragon  (Light Umber 'A')
=== Num:412  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:591  Ac:90  Exp:1900
A huge draconic form enveloped in a cascade of colour.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 8290.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe fire or confusion powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind, confuse or 
 slow powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash
 down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.
It is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for
 4d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d8 
 damage.  

The Ancient white dragon  (White 'A')
=== Num:424  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:591  Ac:90  Exp:1900
A huge draconic form.  Frost covers it from head to tail.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 8290.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe frost powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can 
 claw to hurt you for 4d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d8 damage and bite to 
 freeze you for 7d8 damage.  

The Ice golem  (Light Blue 'g')
=== Num:834  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:278  Ac:60  Exp:1900
It is a massive ice statue that moves steadily towards you.  This evil creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster
 or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 8290.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce frost balls or produce ice
 bolts; 1 time in 9.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold, poison and edged
 weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can hit to hurt
you for 4d6 damage and touch to freeze you for 4d3 damage.  

The Queen Ant  (Violet 'a')
=== Num:1145  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:1200  Ac:100  Exp:1900
She's upset because you hurt her children.  This insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 38 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 8290.91 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is dangerous at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which summon
 similar monsters; 1 time in 1.  She can bash down doors.  She is rarely
 detected by telepathy.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is
 fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She
 usually appears with escorts.  She may carry up to 3 garments, edible items or 
 junk items.  She can bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you for
 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d8 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d8 
 damage.  

The Ancient green dragon  (Green 'A')
=== Num:425  Lev:38  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:591  Ac:90  Exp:2000
A huge draconic form enveloped in clouds of poisonous vapour.  This evil dragon
 is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 8727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may breathe poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d8 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d8 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for
 7d8 damage.  

The Will o' the wisp  (Light Slate 'E')
=== Num:396  Lev:38  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:140  Ac:150  Exp:2100
A strange ball of glowing light.  It disappears and reappears and seems to draw
 you to it.  You seem somehow compelled to stand still and watch its strange
 dancing motion.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves
 somewhat erratically and very quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 9163.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which blink-self, teleport-self, teleport-self to, cause wounds, 
 confuse or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2
 .  It can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is invisible.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness, edged
 and blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can hit
to hurt you for 1d9 damage and hit to space out you for 1d9 damage.  

The Magma elemental  (Orange 'E')
=== Num:397  Lev:38  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:166  Ac:70  Exp:2100
It is a towering glowing form of molten hate.  This creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 38 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 9163.64
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may throw a boulder at to burn you with lava for 7d6 damage; 1 time in 6 and
 is also magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, produce plasma bolts
 or recover mana; 1 time in 6.  It can pass through walls.  It is not detected
 by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire and poison.  It resists 
 lava, plasma and blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 100
 feet.  It can hit to burn you with lava for 6d7 damage and hit to hurt you for
 4d6 damage.  

The Spirit troll  (Deep Light Blue 'T')
=== Num:432  Lev:38  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:2100
A weird ghostly troll-like being from the ethereal plane.  This evil undead 
 troll is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves at normal speed, but is 
 larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 9163.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can pass through walls, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry a chest, weapon, garment, edible item, junk item or 
 treasure.  It can hit to batter you for 2d9 damage, hit to batter you for 2d9 
 damage and bite to reduce wisdom from you for 1d10 damage.  

[U] King Theoden, possessed by Saruman  (Light Yellow 't')
=== Num:1311  Lev:38  Rar:3  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:2600
The noble king of the Riddermark, he has been poisoned by Saruman's words and
 appears unnaturally aged and weak. The grip on his sword is still strong
 however.  This man warrior is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves
 quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 11345.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is dangerous at his native depth.  He may spit to poison you 
 for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which summon
 monsters of the same class or slow powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 10.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to
 3 good weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions or 
 edible items.  He can hit to wound you for 5d5 damage, hit to wound you for
 5d5 damage, hit to drain mana from you for 5d5 damage, plus spell points and 
 spit to poison you for 5d6 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

[U] Eilinel the Entrapped  (Light Violet 'G')
=== Num:638  Lev:38  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:828  Ac:40  Exp:8400
In life, she was the wife of Gorlim. In death, her shade was entrapped by
 Morgoth and used to trick her husband into betraying Barahir. Now she is
 totally entrapped by Morgoth's power, and uses her magic to do his bidding.  
 This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 38 and moves
 quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth 36654.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  She is deadly at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce acid bolts, produce mana bolts, heal-self, 
 blink-self, teleport to, cause wounds or summon a monster; 1 time in 2.  She
 can open doors and bash down doors.  She is immune to fire, cold and blunt
 weapons.  She cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  She is
 vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from 100 feet.  She may carry up
 to 5 good garments, tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  She can 
 hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 3d5 damage, touch to drain
charges from your wands and staffs for 3d3 damage and touch to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 3d3 damage.  

[U] the Black Rider at Bree  (Light Dark 'W')
=== Num:440  Lev:38  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:1584  Ac:60  Exp:46000
A tall black cloaked Ringwraith.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 38 and moves quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 200727.27 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.
; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which recover mana, cure-self
 or probe your weaknesses; 1 time in 6.  He can open doors and bash down doors.
He is cold blooded.  He is immune to cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 900 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, armours, garments, 
 adornments, magical devices or potions.  He can hit to hurt you for 12d6 
 damage and hit to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 8d6 damage.  It is
 a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Pit lich|||es|  (Mustard 'L')
=== Num:963  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:776  Ac:69  Exp:2200
It is a skeletal form dressed in robes.  It radiates vastly evil power.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 39 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 9800.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which blink-self, teleport to, teleport away, drain mana, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1
 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists 
 nether and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4
garments, adornments, magical devices, written items or treasures.  It can 
 touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you, touch to drain charges from 
 your wands and staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d11 
 damage and touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d11 damage.  

The Tyrant of Hell  (Light Purple 'U')
=== Num:1226  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:837  Ac:40  Exp:2200
A haughty-faced humanoid the size of a child, surrounded by the dark fire of
 the nethermost hells.  As she gestures imperiously, demons materialize and leap
 upon you.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 39 and moves
 very quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 9800.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous
 at her native depth.  She may shriek to reduce constitution from you for 1d7 
 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce mana bolts, produce cone of hellfire, recover mana, curse you, cause
 mind blasting, cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, summon a demon, 
 summon Greater Demons or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  She can open doors and bash
 down doors.  She resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and
 wands.  She tends to overlook intruders, which she may notice from 250 feet.  
 She may carry up to 4 weapons, armours, written items or treasures.  She can 
 hit to hurt you for 1d7 damage, hit to drain charges from your wands and staffs
for 1d7 damage and shriek to reduce constitution from you for 1d7 damage.  

The Knight Templar  (Purple 't')
=== Num:436  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1056  Ac:60  Exp:2300
It seems that the more devout the person, the more likely they are to cross the
 boundary between piety and sanctimoniousness.  And such is the case with the
 Order of the Knights Templar; they are among the most pious and powerful of the
 religious knightly orders, but noted for their intolerance.  Thus it is
 Morgoth's will that is unwittingly done, as the forces of good are set against
 each other.  This man warrior priest is normally found on dungeon level 39 and
 moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 10245.45 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce holy orbs, haste-self, heal-self, cause wounds, incur heroism, 
 terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, 
 bash down doors and pick up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He resists 
 lite and darkness.  He cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  He
 is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may
 carry up to 4 weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to wound you for 5d5 damage, hit to wound
you for 5d5 damage and hit to wound you for 5d5 damage.  

The Ettin  (Light Red 'T')
=== Num:421  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1200  Ac:100  Exp:2400
A massive two-headed troll of huge strength, ettins are stupid but violent. 
 They are also living proof that two heads are not more intelligent than one...
This evil troll is normally found on dungeon level 39 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger, older, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 10690.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you; 1 time
 in 10.  It can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid and 
 poison.  It resists blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 takes quite a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry one or two chests, weapons, garments, edible items or junk items.  
 It can hit to batter you for 3d12 damage, crush to hurt you for 5d5 damage and 
 bite to wound you for 1d15 damage.  

The Maia  (Umber 'M')
=== Num:1152  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:484  Ac:60  Exp:2400
A spirit that descended into Arda in the beginning.  This mix of elf and demon
 is normally found on dungeon level 39 and moves quickly.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 10690.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce holy orbs, recover mana, cure-self, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2.  It can 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists nether, nexus, disenchantment, magical spells and the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit
to hurt you for 8d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d4 damage, hit to hurt you for
 8d4 damage and hit to hurt you for 8d4 damage.  

The Shade  (Deep Light Blue 'G')
=== Num:346  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:139  Ac:30  Exp:2600
A shadowy form clutches at you from the darkness.  A powerful undead creature
 with a deadly touch.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 39 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 11581.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may wail to terrify you; 1 time in 16 and is also magical, casting
 spells which drain mana, cause amnesia, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 16.  It
 can pass through walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It resists darkness
 .  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 4 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  It can wail to terrify you, 
 touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you and claw to reduce intelligence
 from you for 2d10 damage.  

The Conjurer  (Violet 'q')
=== Num:437  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:933  Ac:60  Exp:2600
A human figure in robes, she moves with magically improved speed, and her hands
 are ablur with spell casting.  This evil woman mage is normally found on
 dungeon level 39 and moves very quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 11581.82 points for a 1st
 level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce acid balls, produce lightning balls
 , produce fire balls, produce frost balls, produce mana bolts, haste-self, 
 recover mana, blink-self, teleport-self, create a shield, give resistance to
 the elements, summon a monster, cause hallucinations, terrify, blind, confuse
 or paralyze; 1 time in 1.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and 
 bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  She cannot be confused, charmed
 or slept.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She may carry up to 5 weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical
 devices, written items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for
 2d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage.


The Spectre  (Light Umber 'G')
=== Num:347  Lev:39  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:139  Ac:30  Exp:2700
A phantasmal shrieking spirit.  Its wail drives the intense cold of pure evil
 deep within your body.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 39 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 12027.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may wail to terrify you; 1 time in 16 and is also magical, casting
 spells which drain mana, cause amnesia, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 16.  It
 can pass through walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be 
 stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 garments, 
 tools, musical items or junk items.  It can wail to terrify you, touch to 
 drain experience (by 40d6+) from you and claw to reduce wisdom from you for
 5d5 damage.  

[U] Scatha the Worm  (Deep Light Blue 'A')
=== Num:473  Lev:39  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1628  Ac:130  Exp:16000
An ancient and wise Dragon.  Scatha has grown clever over the long years.  His
 scales are covered with frost, and his breath sends a shower of ice into the
 air.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 39 and moves quickly
 .  Killing this creature is worth 71272.73 points for a 1st level character.  
 He is deadly at his native depth.  He may breathe frost powerfully; 1 time in 4
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which cause wounds or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  He can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  He is cold blooded.  He is immune to cold.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He tends to overlook intruders, which he may notice from
 300 feet.  He may carry up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  He can 
 claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to 
 freeze you for 4d14 damage and bite to freeze you for 4d14 damage.  It is a
 dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Gorlim, Betrayer of Barahir  (Green 'q')
=== Num:454  Lev:39  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:1216  Ac:120  Exp:17000
This sad creature - once a mighty warrior - betrayed his former friends to
 Morgoth's army in return for, he thought, safety for himself and his wife.  And
 so he fell under Morgoth's power and became little more than a mindless servant
 of evil, even though the other side of his "bargain" was not kept.  This man
 warrior is normally found on dungeon level 39 and moves quickly.  Killing this
 creature is worth 75727.27 points for a 1st level character.  He is over
 powered at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce water bolts, produce mana bolts or cause wounds; 1 time in 2.  
 He can carry a lite to see you, open doors and bash down doors.  He needs lite
 to see you.  He is immune to acid, lightning, cold and poison.  He cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  He takes quite a while to see intruders, which he
 may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 3 good weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, magical devices, written items, potions or edible items.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 8d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d6 damage, hit to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d8 damage and hit to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 6d8 damage.  

The Chaos hound  (Light Purple 'Z')
=== Num:518  Lev:40  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:744  Ac:100  Exp:2100
A constantly changing canine form, this hound rushes towards you as if
 expecting mayhem and chaos ahead.  It appears to have an almost kamikaze relish
 for combat.  You suspect all may not be as it seems.  This animal is normally
 found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 9545.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe chaos; 1 time in
 5.  It can bash down doors and track you unerringly over land, but not through
 water.  It resists chaos.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually
 appears in groups.  It can claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage, claw to hurt you 
 for 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for
 2d12 damage.  

The Ancient red dragon  (Red 'A')
=== Num:444  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:2800
A huge draconic form.  Wisps of smoke steam from its nostrils and the extreme
 heat surrounding it makes you gasp for breath.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 12727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to burn you for 7d9 damage.  

The Storm giant  (Yellow 'P')
=== Num:333  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:704  Ac:60  Exp:2900
It is a twenty-five foot tall giant wreathed in lightning.  This evil giant is
 normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is older, more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 13181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to lash you with wind, rain and
 lightning for 9d10 damage; 1 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells
 which produce lightning balls, produce storm balls, produce water bolts, 
 blink-self, teleport to, terrify or confuse; 1 time in 6.  It can carry a lite
 to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It needs lite to
 see you.  It is immune to lightning and cold.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 chests, 
 musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  It can hit to batter you 
 for 10d8 damage and hit to electrify you for 10d8 damage.  

The Ancient black dragon  (Light Dark 'A')
=== Num:429  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:2900
A huge draconic form.  Pools of acid melt the floor around it.  This evil 
 dragon is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 13181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe acid powerfully; 1 time in 5
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind, 
 confuse or slow powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to acid.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept
 .  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to
hurt you for 4d9 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to dissolve 
 you for 7d9 damage.  

The Nether wraith  (Light Green 'W')
=== Num:419  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:428  Ac:55  Exp:3000
A form that hurts the eye, death permeates the air around it.  As it nears you,
 a coldness saps your soul.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 13636.36 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which produce nether bolts, incur wraithform, create darkness, 
 cause mind blasting, cause wounds, terrify or blind; 1 time in 5.  It can pass
 through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists 
 nether.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, 
 armours, garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  It can hit to hurt
you for 1d12 damage, hit to hurt you for 1d12 damage, touch to drain experience
 (by 80d6+) from you and touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you.  

The Ancient silver dragon  (Light Slate 'A')
=== Num:694  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:800  Ac:100  Exp:3000
A huge draconic form.  Fear grips your very soul and you cring away from its
 terrifying visage.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 40 and
 moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 13636.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe frost
 or fear powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to cold.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 
 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  It can claw to hurt you for
 4d9 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to blast you with nexus 
 for 7d9 damage.  

The Troll |King|Queen|Monarchs|  (Light Violet 'T')
=== Num:1062  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1275  Ac:75  Exp:3000
This troll is a Queen among Trolls. She is one of the biggest and strongest of
 all her kind, but fortunately blessed with trollish brains.  This evil troll
 is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is larger, older
 or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 13636.36 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native
 depth.  She can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 , pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  She is
 immune to poison.  She cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  She
 takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She
 usually appears with escorts.  She may carry up to 3 chests, weapons, garments
 , edible items, junk items or treasures.  She can hit to batter you for 2d12 
 damage, hit to batter you for 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 3d10 damage
 and bite to hurt you for 3d10 damage.  

The Ancient grey dragon  (Slate 'A')
=== Num:1124  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:3000
A huge draconic form.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 40
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 13636.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe acid or 
 frost powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to acid and cold.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 chests, armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d9 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d9 damage.  

The Ancient yellow dragon  (Yellow 'A')
=== Num:1129  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:3000
A huge draconic form.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 40
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 13636.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe fire or 
 poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire and poison.  
 It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d9 damage.  

The Ancient cyan dragon  (Teal 'A')
=== Num:1133  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:3000
A huge draconic form.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 40
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 13636.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning or poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning and 
 poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d9 damage.  

The Ancient purple dragon  (Purple 'A')
=== Num:1137  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:3000
A huge draconic form.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 40
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 13636.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe fire or 
 poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire and poison.  
 It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d9 damage.  

The Night mare  (Violet 'Q')
=== Num:427  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1245  Ac:85  Exp:3100
A fearsome skeletal horse with glowing eyes, that watch you with little more
 than a hatred of all that lives.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is larger, older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 14090.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can bash
 down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists darkness.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may
 notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.  It can bite to drain 
 experience (by 80d6+) from you for 2d6 damage and kick to hurt you for 3d18 
 damage.  

The Roc  (Mustard 'B')
=== Num:439  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:482  Ac:70  Exp:3100
A vast legendary bird, its iron talons rake the most impenetrable of surfaces
 and its screech echoes through the many winding dungeon corridors.  This 
 animal is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is larger
 or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 14090.91
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and
 cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is immune to lightning.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It can claw
to hurt you for 8d12 damage, crush to hurt you for 8d12 damage and peck to 
 electrify you.  

The Ancient gold dragon  (Yellow 'A')
=== Num:445  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:820  Ac:90  Exp:3100
A huge draconic form wreathed in a nimbus of light. Its roar stuns and deafens
 you.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 14090.91 points for a 1st level character.
It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe poison or sound powerfully
 ; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, 
 blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to poison.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or precious
 metals.  It can claw to batter you for 4d9 damage, claw to batter you for 4d9 
 damage and bite to batter you for 7d9 damage.  

The Betrayed  (Red 'M')
=== Num:415  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:432  Ac:68  Exp:3200
Betrayed by Melkor when the battle was lost, and his false beauty turned in on
 itself and was consumed, this Maia sees nothing but bitterness and an ugly
 reality, and takes out his all consuming anger on everything around him.  This
 mix of elf and demon is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 14545.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to terrify you 
 for 3d4 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce lightning balls, produce balls of light, produce holy orbs, 
 recover mana, teleport-self to, cause wounds, summon similar monsters or 
 terrify powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can 
 open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is immune to acid, 
 lightning, cold and poison.  It resists magical spells, the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands and blunt weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It prefers to ignore intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may
 carry up to 5 weapons, armours or written items.  It can gaze to terrify you 
 for 3d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 7d7 damage and hit to hurt you for 7d7 
 damage.  

The Winged Horror  (Light Umber 'B')
=== Num:562  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:851  Ac:80  Exp:3200
A terrifying sight:  a winged creature greater than any bird you have ever
 seen, and with no feathers on its horrid black leathery wings.  Descended from
 a creature of an older world perhaps, bred by Sauron to be a winged steed for
 his Ringwraiths.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves
 quickly, but is larger or older deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 14545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe poison, darkness or nether; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 can eat bodies to regain strength.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists nether and 
 darkness.  It is observant of intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  
 It can claw to hurt you for 3d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 3d8 damage, peck 
 to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 4d6 damage and peck to drain 
 experience (by 40d6+) from you for 4d6 damage.  

The Barbazu  (Light Green 'U')
=== Num:567  Lev:40  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:748  Ac:60  Exp:3200
A foul, humanoid creature with a long tail, clawed hands and feet, and a
 disgusting, wiry, snaky beard.  They are the elite shock troops of the hells,
 capable of a terrifying berserk fury.  This evil demon is normally found on
 dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 14545.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It may create a
 spike to hurt you for 20d5 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 10 and is
 also magical, casting spells which summon a demon or terrify powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 10.  It can open doors and bash down
 doors.  It is immune to acid, cold and poison.  It resists magical spells and 
 the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 250
 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It may carry one or two weapons, armours
 or written items.  It can hit to hurt you for 8d10 damage, hit to reduce 
 constitution from you for 10d2 damage and sting to hurt and poison you for 5d5 
 damage.  

The Guardian lich|||es|  (Light Violet 'L')
=== Num:965  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:1105  Ac:75  Exp:3200
It is a skeletal form dressed in robes.  It radiates vastly evil power.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 14545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which blink-self, teleport away, create darkness, drain mana, cause mind
 blasting, cause wounds, create a shield, give resistance to the elements, 
 terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash
 down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to 
 lightning, cold and poison.  It resists nether, nexus and edged weapons.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 garments, adornments, 
 magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain experience (by 40d6+)
 from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 2d12 damage and touch to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 2d12 damage.  

The Earth elemental  (Umber 'E')
=== Num:359  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:146  Ac:60  Exp:3300
It is a towering form composed of rock with fists of awesome power.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves at normal speed, but
 is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 15000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 20d6 damage or 
 spray to blast you with shards; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 which produce shard balls or recover mana; 1 time in 5.  It can pass through
 walls, dig through earth and rubble and leave a trail behind it.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is
 immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It resists 
 blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It can hit 
 to batter you for 6d10 damage, hit to batter you for 6d10 damage and spray to 
 blast you with shards.  

The Aether vort|ex|ex|ices|  (Light Violet 'v')
=== Num:503  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:387  Ac:40  Exp:3400
An awesome vortex of pure magic, power radiates from its frame.  This creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves extremely erratically and very
 quickly, but is larger or faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 15454.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost, poison, 
 plasma, light, darkness, confusion, sound, shards, inertia, gravity, force, 
 chaos, nexus, nether or time powerfully; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors
 and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists nether, plasma, nexus, blindness, lite, darkness and chaos.  It cannot
 be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant
 for intruders, which it may notice from 1000 feet.  It can envelope to 
 electrify you for 5d5 damage, envelope to burn you for 5d5 damage, envelope to
dissolve you for 5d5 damage and envelope to freeze you for 5d5 damage.  

The Greater basilisk  (Light Purple 'R')
=== Num:601  Lev:40  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:808  Ac:100  Exp:3400
A large basilisk, whose shape resembles that of a great wyrm.  This evil animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 15454.55 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to petrify
you for 3d12 damage or gaze to petrify you for 3d12 damage and may breathe 
 poison, darkness or nexus powerfully; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to poison.  It resists nexus and darkness.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 250 feet.  It may carry one or two good garments or junk items.  
 It can gaze to petrify you for 3d12 damage, gaze to petrify you for 3d12 
 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt and poison
you for 2d12 damage.  

[U] Itangast, the Fire Drake  (Magenta-Pink 'A')
=== Num:480  Lev:40  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1672  Ac:120  Exp:16000
A mighty ancient dragon, Itangast's form scorches your flesh.  Wisps of smoke
 curl up from his nostrils as he regards you with disdain.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature
 is worth 72727.27 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his
 native depth.  He may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which cause wounds or confuse powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  He can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  He is immune
 to fire.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He tends to overlook
 intruders, which he may notice from 300 feet.  He may carry up to 7 good 
 chests, armours or adornments.  He can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 4d10 damage, bite to burn you for 4d14 damage and bite to burn
you for 4d14 damage.  

[U] the Black Rider at Weathertop  (Teal 'W')
=== Num:449  Lev:40  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:1848  Ac:60  Exp:84000
A tall black cloaked Ringwraith.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 40 and moves quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 381818.18 points for a 1st level character.  She is deadly at her native
 depth.  She may create a dart to poison you; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells which produce acid bolts, produce fire bolts, produce frost
 bolts, produce nether bolts, recover mana, cure-self, give invisibility, incur
 wraithform, curse you, cause wounds, probe your weaknesses, summon a monster, 
 cause amnesia, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  She can pick up
 objects.  She is cold blooded.  She is hurt by bright light.  She is immune to 
 cold and poison.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 900 feet.  She may carry up
 to 4 good weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  
 She can hit to hurt you for 12d6 damage and touch to drain experience (by
 80d6+) from you for 5d6 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

The Xaren  (Slate 'X')
=== Num:438  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:336  Ac:80  Exp:3400
It is a tougher relative of the Xorn.  Its hide glitters with metal ores.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 41 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 15763.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It can pass through walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists edged weapons.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.  It can hit to hurt you
for 3d9 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d9 damage.  

The Haradrim berserker  (Light Violet 't')
=== Num:583  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1260  Ac:80  Exp:3500
Even the strongest of normal human warriors fears the Berserker - the one who
 can drive herself into such a terrible battle-frenzy that she can survive blows
 which should kill her, and still apparently feel no pain.  She tramples weaker
 creatures underfoot in her eagerness to get to her real enemy, and her
 battle-cry strikes terror into her foes.  This evil woman warrior is normally
 found on dungeon level 41 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 16227.27 points for a
 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a
 crossbow bolt to hurt you for 15d7 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also magical,
 casting spells which haste-self, incur beserk rage or terrify; 1 time in 4.  
 She can carry a lite to see you and bash down doors.  She needs lite to see
 you.  She regenerates quickly.  She cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200
 feet.  She may carry up to 4 weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools, lites, 
 adornments, musical items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to wound you 
 for 6d6 damage, hit to wound you for 6d6 damage and hit to wound you for 6d6 
 damage.  

The Ancient copper dragon  (Umber 'A')
=== Num:693  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:800  Ac:100  Exp:3500
A huge draconic form.  Space twists and weaves around its wings and the place
 you thought it was a moment ago is empty.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 41 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 16227.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe lightning or nexus powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to lightning.  It resists nexus.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  It can claw
to hurt you for 4d9 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to blast 
 you with chaos for 7d9 damage.  

The Power drake  (Magenta-Pink 'D')
=== Num:1150  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:520  Ac:100  Exp:3500
An extremely dangerous drake.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 41 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 16227.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, 
 lightning, fire, frost, poison, light, darkness, confusion, sound, chaos, 
 disenchantment, nexus or nether powerfully; 1 time in 4 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can fly over obstacles and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  It resists nether, plasma, nexus, disenchantment, lite, 
 darkness and chaos.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may
 carry up to 3 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d5 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d5 damage and bite to hurt you for 4d8 damage.  

The Uruk berserker  (Orange 'o')
=== Num:1309  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1260  Ac:80  Exp:3500
Even the strongest of normal orcs fears the Berserker - the one who can drive
 herself into such a terrible battle-frenzy that she can survive blows which
 should kill her, and still apparently feel no pain.  She tramples weaker
 creatures underfoot in her eagerness to get to her real enemy, and her
 battle-cry strikes terror into her foes.  This evil orc warrior is normally
 found on dungeon level 41 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 16227.27 points for a
 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a
 crossbow bolt to hurt you for 15d7 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also magical,
 casting spells which haste-self, incur beserk rage or terrify; 1 time in 4.  
 She can carry a lite to see you, bash down doors and track you over land, but
 not through water.  She needs lite to see you.  She regenerates quickly.  She
 resists darkness.  She cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  She
 is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may
 carry up to 4 weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, edible items
 or junk items.  She can hit to wound you for 6d6 damage, hit to wound you for
 6d6 damage and hit to wound you for 6d6 damage.  

The Ancient brass dragon  (Orange 'A')
=== Num:695  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:800  Ac:100  Exp:3600
A huge draconic form.  Magic drains from around its shape  and there is a
 static feeling in the air.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 41 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 16690.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may
 breathe acid or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 cold.  It resists disenchantment.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 7 chests, armours, adornments or precious metals.  It can claw to 
 hurt you for 4d9 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d9 damage and bite to blast you
with disenchantment for 7d9 damage.  

The Marilith  (Yellow 'U')
=== Num:465  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1190  Ac:75  Exp:3700
She is a demon of female form with many arms, each bearing deadly weapons.  
 This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 41 and moves quickly, but
 is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 17154.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous
 at her native depth.  She may lash to wound you for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 8
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, produce plasma
 bolts, cause wounds, summon a demon or blind powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 8.  She can open doors and bash down doors.  She is
 immune to lightning, fire and cold.  She resists magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 She pays little attention to intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  
 She may carry one or two weapons, armours or written items.  She can hit to 
 wound you for 5d6 damage, hit to wound you for 5d6 damage, hit to wound you 
 for 5d6 damage and lash to wound you for 5d6 damage.  

The Grand Master thie|f|f|ves|  (Blue Slate 't')
=== Num:1057  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:1073  Ac:75  Exp:3700
A class of her own: you are already too late to protect your possessions - and
 her seems to have studied magic too, and is a master of setting traps.  This
 evil woman thief is normally found on dungeon level 41 and moves very quickly.
A kill of this creature is worth 17154.55 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may create a shot to hurt you; 1
 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which blink-self, 
 teleport-self, teleport-self to, teleport to, create darkness, create traps, 
 blind, confuse or slow powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time
 in 4.  She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and hide in
 unusual places.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may
 notice from 500 feet.  She may carry up to 3 weapons, missile weapons, 
 garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, potions, edible items or 
 treasures.  She can hit to steal items from you for 5d5 damage, hit to steal 
 items from you for 5d5 damage and hit to steal gold from you for 5d5 damage.  

The Death mold  (Light Violet 'm')
=== Num:479  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+30  Hp:924  Ac:60  Exp:3800
It is the epitome of all that is evil, in a mold.  Its lifeless form draws
 power from sucking the souls of those that approach it, a nimbus of pure evil
 surrounds it.  Luckily for you, it can't move.  This evil plant is normally
 found on dungeon level 41 and moves incredibly quickly, but is larger deeper
 in the dungeon and does not deign to chase intruders.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 17618.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It can communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists blindness.  It
 cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 2000 feet.  It can touch to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 7d7 damage, touch to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 7d7 damage, touch to disenchant your armour and weapons
for 7d7 damage and touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 5d5 damage
 .  

The Corpse-candle  (Light Yellow 'G')
=== Num:490  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:198  Ac:30  Exp:4000
A dead-faced drowned spirit which burns with the rage of the battle which
 killed it.  You are hypnotised by its flickering flames.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 41 and moves a bit erratically at
 normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 18545.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to paralyze you 
 for 5d5 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 fire bolts, produce water bolts or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can pass through walls, pick up objects, swim
 under water and fly over obstacles.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is immune to fire, cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It
 resists water.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 4 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  It can claw to blast 
 you with water for 5d5 damage, claw to blast you with water for 5d5 damage and 
 gaze to paralyze you for 5d5 damage.  

The Premonition  (Umber 'G')
=== Num:843  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:198  Ac:30  Exp:4000
A premonition of death. Its claws reach out to fulfill its dark purpose.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 41 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 18545.45 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which create darkness, drain mana, blind or paralyze powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 8.  It can pass through walls, pick up
 objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, 
 poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or 
 cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 4 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  It can 
 claw to reduce constitution from you for 5d5 damage and claw to reduce 
 constitution from you for 5d5 damage.  

The 8-headed hydra  (Light Red 'y')
=== Num:1070  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:800  Ac:100  Exp:4000
A strange reptilian hybrid with eight heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 41 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 18545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe fire or frost; 1 time in 4
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, produce frost
 balls, produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, produce plasma bolts, produce
 ice bolts or terrify; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to
 regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It lights up
 the surroundings.  It is immune to fire and cold.  It resists lava, plasma and 
 blindness.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.  It can bite to freeze you for 3d12 
 damage, bite to burn you for 3d12 damage, bite to freeze you for 3d12 damage
 and bite to burn you for 3d12 damage.  

The Shadow  (Blue Slate 'G')
=== Num:377  Lev:41  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:99  Ac:30  Exp:4200
A mighty spirit of darkness of vaguely humanoid form.  Razor-edged claws reach
 out to end your life as it glides towards you, seeking to suck the energy from
 your soul to feed its power.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 41 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 19472.73 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which produce nether bolts, teleport to or slow; 1 time in 6.  
 It can pass through walls.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It resists darkness.  It cannot be 
 stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, 
 musical items or junk items.  It can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from
you, touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you, claw to reduce intelligence
 from you for 2d10 damage and claw to reduce wisdom from you for 2d10 damage.  

[U] Eol, the Dark Elf  (Light Dark 'l')
=== Num:594  Lev:41  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:1920  Ac:100  Exp:8700
A lord of the Teleri, Eol is a mighty metalsmith, the only one to ever forge
 weapons of meteorite iron.  The mortal enemy of the Eldar, he is currently
 fleeing their wrath, following the murder of Princess Aredhel of Gondolin.  
 This evil elf is normally found on dungeon level 41 and moves very quickly.  
 Killing this creature is worth 40336.36 points for a 1st level character.  He
 is dangerous at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce acid balls, produce lightning balls, produce fire balls, produce
 frost balls, produce nether balls, produce mana bolts, heal-self, blink-self, 
 teleport to, create darkness, cause wounds, summon monsters, summon a dragon, 
 summon a demon, summon an undead, blind or confuse; 1 time in 1.  He can open
 doors and bash down doors.  He is hurt by bright light.  He is immune to fire, 
 cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He tends to
 overlook intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 7
 good weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, written items, 
 musical items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage
 , hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

[U] the Tyrant of Fire  (Red 'E')
=== Num:416  Lev:41  Rar:7  Spd:+10  Hp:2160  Ac:50  Exp:85000
A towering fire elemental, it burns everything beyond recognition.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 41 and moves a bit erratically and
 quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth 394090.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  ; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, produce plasma bolts, 
 recover mana or summon monsters of the same group; 1 time in 4.  It can bash
 down doors.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning
 , fire and poison.  It resists lava, blindness and blunt weapons.  It cannot
 be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 120 feet.  It usually appears with escorts.  It can 
 hit to burn you for 5d6 damage, hit to burn you for 5d6 damage and hit to burn
you for 5d6 damage.  

The Gold golem  (Yellow 'g')
=== Num:831  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:1240  Ac:100  Exp:3800
It is a massive gold statue carved in the shape of a lion.  It charges towards
 you, roaring in a facisimilie of anger.  This creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 42 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, faster or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 17963.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce sound balls, haste-self or 
 incur beserk rage; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold, 
 poison and edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept
 .  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 may carry up to 3 precious metals.  It can hit to batter you for 2d10 damage
 and hit to batter you for 2d10 damage.  

The Beholder  (Light Umber 'e')
=== Num:413  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1344  Ac:80  Exp:4200
A vile creature with one huge central eye, twelve smaller eyes on stalks, and a
 huge mouth filled with sharp teeth.  This evil creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 42 and moves quickly, but is larger, older, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 19854.55
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may gaze to drain experience (by 20d6+) from you for 2d6 damage, gaze to drain
charges from your wands and staffs for 2d6 damage or gaze to reduce 
 intelligence from you for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting
 spells which produce acid bolts, produce lightning bolts, produce fire bolts, 
 produce frost bolts, create darkness, drain mana, cause mind blasting, probe
 your weaknesses, cause amnesia, terrify, blind, confuse or slow; 1 time in 2.  
 It can bash down doors and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It
 must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It is immune to poison.  
 It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can gaze to drain experience (by 20d6+)
 from you for 2d6 damage, gaze to drain charges from your wands and staffs for
 2d6 damage, gaze to reduce intelligence from you for 2d6 damage and bite to 
 hurt you for 6d6 damage.  

The Dread  (Orange 'G')
=== Num:460  Lev:42  Rar:7  Spd:+10  Hp:247  Ac:30  Exp:4200
It is a form that screams its presence against the eye.  Death incarnate, its
 hideous black body seems to struggle against reality as the universe itself
 struggles to banish it.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 42 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more powerful
 or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 19854.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce nether bolts, drain mana, 
 blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 16.  It can pass through walls, pick up
 objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, 
 poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or 
 cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It usually appears in groups.  It may carry a garment, tool, musical item or 
 junk item.  It can hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 6d6 
 damage and hit to reduce strength and size from you for 3d4 damage.  

The Eog golem  (Umber 'g')
=== Num:362  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:-5  Hp:788  Ac:125  Exp:4400
It is a massive deep brown statue, striding towards you with an
 all-too-familiar purpose.  Your magic surprisingly feels much less powerful now.
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 42 and moves slowly, but is 
 larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 20800.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which heal-self or drain
 mana; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold, poison
 and edged weapons.  It resists magical spells, the effects of rods, staffs and
 wands and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, 
 slept, slowed or paralyzed.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It may carry up to 3 treasures.  It can hit to hurt you
for 8d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 8d6 damage.  

The Angst  (Light Violet 'G')
=== Num:369  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:247  Ac:30  Exp:4400
It is a form that screams its presence against the eye.  Death incarnate, its
 hideous black body seems to struggle against reality as the universe itself
 struggles to banish it.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 42 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more powerful
 or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 20800.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce nether bolts, drain mana, 
 blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 16.  It can pass through walls and pick
 up objects.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, 
 poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or 
 cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  
 It may carry up to 4 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  It can hit
to hurt you for 6d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage and hit to reduce 
 strength and size from you for 3d4 damage.  

The Wizard of the High Council  (Light Violet 'h')
=== Num:1225  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:1169  Ac:18  Exp:4400
Short of stature though this ancient gnome may be, her reputation in the
 esoteric magics is unsurpassed, and her spells the stuff of wonder.  This 
 dwarf mage is normally found on dungeon level 42 and moves very quickly, but
 is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 20800.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 balls of light, produce confusion balls, produce sound balls, produce chaos
 balls, invoke mana storms, produce cone of force, recover mana, give
 resistance to the elements, probe your weaknesses, blind or confuse; 1 time in
 2.  She can carry a lite to see you and open doors.  She needs lite to see
 you.  She resists nexus.  She cannot be charmed, slept, slowed or paralyzed.  
 She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 may carry up to 4 weapons, missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, 
 written items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit to drain 
 charges from your wands and staffs for 1d16 damage, hit to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 1d16 damage and hit to confuse you for 1d16 damage.  

The Bewitched||||  (Light Green 'M')
=== Num:350  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:389  Ac:68  Exp:4500
A Maia who succumbed to the early beautious riffs Melkor perpetuated and
 believes the sweet refrains to be the new truth of the world.  He strikes out
 angrily at the ugliness around him, not realising the source of its anguish.  
 This mix of elf and demon is normally found on dungeon level 42 and moves
 quickly.  Destruction of this creature is worth 21272.73 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to terrify
you for 2d6 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce sound balls, haste-self, heal-self, cause mind
 blasting, summon monsters, terrify or blind powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, bash down doors and pick up
 objects.  It is immune to acid, lightning, cold and poison.  It resists 
 magical spells, the effects of rods, staffs and wands and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It prefers to ignore
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, 
 armours or written items.  It can gaze to terrify you for 2d6 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 4d13 damage and hit to hurt you for 4d13 damage.  

The Troll High Priest||ess|s|  (Blue 'T')
=== Num:1063  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:2016  Ac:80  Exp:4600
This troll is High Priest, seems to be intelligent, and has great power. Her
 proficiency with spells alarms you as you flee her anger.  This evil troll
 priest is normally found on dungeon level 42 and moves quickly, but is larger, 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 21745.45 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which heal-self, 
 cure-self, blink-self, teleport to, cause wounds or incur heroism; 1 time in 3
 .  She can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength, 
 pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  She is immune
 to poison.  She cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  She takes a
 while to see intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She usually
 appears with escorts.  She may carry up to 3 chests, weapons, garments, edible
 items, junk items or treasures.  She can hit to batter you for 2d12 damage, 
 hit to batter you for 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 3d8 damage and bite to
hurt you for 3d8 damage.  

[U] the Elf-king of Dagorlad  (Light Teal 'l')
=== Num:442  Lev:42  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:548  Ac:125  Exp:4700
He rules only a devastated wasteland, contaminated and unhealthy, with ponds of
 poisonous slick and mounds of scorched earth.  This evil undead elf warrior
 mage is normally found on dungeon level 42 and moves very quickly, but is more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destroying this creature is worth 22218.18
 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He may 
 shriek to reduce intelligence from you for 8d8 damage or create an arrow to 
 drain charges from your wands and staffs for 16d8 damage; 1 time in 4 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which invoke darkness storms, 
 produce poison bolts, heal-self, blink-self, create darkness, drain mana, 
 cause wounds, summon a monster, summon monsters of the same race, summon a
 demon, summon an undead, blind or confuse; 1 time in 2.  He lights up the
 surroundings.  He is invisible.  He is cold blooded.  He is immune to blunt
 weapons.  He resists nether and lite.  He cannot be stunned, confused, charmed
 , slept or cut.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from
 200 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 3 good missile
 weapons, armours, tools or musical items.  He can hit to drain experience (by
 80d6+) from you for 8d16 damage, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from 
 you for 8d8 damage and shriek to reduce intelligence from you for 8d8 damage.  
 It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Elder aranea  (Red 'S')
=== Num:603  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1044  Ac:65  Exp:4700
A vast, bloated arachnid, master of its brood: among the more terrible of
 Ungoliant's descendants, this is a monster such as those who haunted the dread
 valley of Nan Dungortheb long ago.  This evil insect is normally found on
 dungeon level 42 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 22218.18 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce fire balls, produce fire bolts, heal-self, 
 drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon similar monsters, summon
 spiders, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, bash down doors
 and climb on walls and ceilings.  It appears in a giant web.  It is hurt by 
 bright light.  It is immune to fire and poison.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears with
 escorts.  It can claw to hurt and poison you for 5d8 damage, claw to hurt and
 poison you for 5d8 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 5d6 damage and bite
to hurt and poison you for 5d6 damage.  

The Black lich|||es|  (Light Dark 'L')
=== Num:966  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:1899  Ac:78  Exp:4900
It is a skeletal form dressed in robes.  It radiates vastly evil power.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 42 and moves at normal
 speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction
 of this creature is worth 23163.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which blink-self, teleport to, teleport away, drain mana, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1
 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists 
 nether and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6
garments, adornments, magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain 
 experience (by 80d6+) from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d12 damage and 
 touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d12 damage.  

The Cyclops|||es|  (Umber 'P')
=== Num:584  Lev:42  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:912  Ac:120  Exp:5100
A gigantic ugly humanoid with but one eye and very thick skin.  This evil giant
 is normally found on dungeon level 42 and moves quickly, but is larger, older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 24109.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 13d10 damage; 1 time
 in 6.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up
 objects.  It needs lite to see you.  It is immune to acid, fire, cold and 
 poison.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.
It may carry one or two chests, musical items, potions, edible items or 
 treasures.  It can hit to batter you for 9d9 damage and hit to batter you for
 9d9 damage.  

[U] Smaug the Golden  (Mustard 'A')
=== Num:475  Lev:42  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1776  Ac:130  Exp:20000
Smaug is one of the Uruloki that still survive, a fire-drake of immense cunning
 and intelligence.  His speed through air is matched by few other dragons and
 his dragonfire is what legends are made of; he is believed to be the greatest
 dragon still surviving into the Third Age.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 42 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 94545.45 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  
 He may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which cause wounds, summon a dragon, blind, confuse or paralyze
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  He can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  He
 is immune to fire.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He tends to
 overlook intruders, which he may notice from 300 feet.  He may carry up to 7
 good chests, armours or adornments.  He can claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, bite to burn you for 5d14 damage and bite to
burn you for 5d14 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress
 further.  

[U] the Black Rider at the Ford to Rivendell  (Blue 'W')
=== Num:453  Lev:42  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2064  Ac:70  Exp:70000
A tall black cloaked Ringwraith.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 42 and moves quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 330909.09 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.
He may gaze to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 6d6 damage; 1 time in 3
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire bolts, produce frost
 bolts, produce nether bolts, recover mana, cure-self, create darkness, curse
 you, cause wounds, summon monsters, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  
 He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is cold blooded.  He is hurt by 
 bright light.  He is immune to cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 900 feet.  He may carry up to 4 good weapons, armours, garments, 
 adornments, magical devices or potions.  He can hit to hurt you for 7d6 damage
 , hit to hurt you for 7d6 damage and gaze to drain experience (by 80d6+) from 
 you for 6d6 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.


The Djinn  (Green 'E')
=== Num:808  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:455  Ac:50  Exp:5100
A powerful air elemental, it is eternally angered at humanity. Flee it while
 you can, for legends tell that a djinn cannot be hurt by mere mortals.  This
 evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.
Destruction of this creature is worth 24572.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce wind balls, recover mana or summon monsters of the
 same group; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors.  It is immune to lightning, 
 poison, edged and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 may carry a good junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage
 , hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage and hit to 
 hurt you for 4d6 damage.  

The Sea dragon  (Light Teal 'D')
=== Num:1141  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:5100
It is a sinuous dragon-like form, that crashes through the waves as it moves.  
 This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves quickly, but
 is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 24572.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe acid or poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can pick up
 objects and track you over land, but not through water.  It must swim and
 cannot move out of water.  It is immune to acid and poison.  It resists nether
 .  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 4d10 damage and bite to confuse you for 7d10 damage.  

The 9-headed hydra  (Blue 'y')
=== Num:434  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+15  Hp:920  Ac:100  Exp:5200
A strange reptilian hybrid with nine heads.  It is lightning fast.  This animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves very quickly, but is larger
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 25054.55 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may spit to 
 blind you for 4d9 damage, doubled against eye monsters and may breathe 
 lightning; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 lightning balls, produce lightning bolts, produce lightening beams, terrify or 
 blind; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength
 and track you over land, but not through water.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is immune to lightning.  It resists blindness.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 treasures.  It can bite to electrify you for 4d9 damage, bite to electrify 
 you for 4d9 damage, bite to electrify you for 4d9 damage and spit to blind you
for 4d9 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Silent killer  (Light Yellow 'E')
=== Num:803  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+30  Hp:145  Ac:55  Exp:5200
It is impossible to define its form but its violence is legendary.  This evil
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves somewhat erratically
 and incredibly quickly, but is faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 25054.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It can open doors, bash down
 doors and pass through walls.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, poison and blunt
 weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 240 feet.  It can hit to hurt
you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d6 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage.  

The Silver golem  (Light Slate 'g')
=== Num:830  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:640  Ac:100  Exp:5300
It is a massive silver statue of a beautiful figure that moves steadily towards
 you.  Its mirror sheen reflects the light all around it.  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves at normal speed, but is larger, 
 faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 25536.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may gaze to blind you for 12d6 damage, doubled against eye
 monsters; 1 time in 7 and is also magical, casting spells which produce balls
 of light; 1 time in 7.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold, 
 poison and edged weapons.  It resists blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It may carry up to 6 precious metals.  It can hit to 
 hurt you for 2d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 2d8 damage and gaze to blind you 
 for 12d6 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Vampire lord  (Blue 'V')
=== Num:428  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1376  Ac:70  Exp:5600
A foul wind chills your bones as this ghastly figure approaches.  This evil
 undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves quickly, but
 is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 26981.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may gaze to paralyze you for 6d1 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce mana bolts, teleport to, incur wraithform
 , create darkness, drain mana, curse you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, 
 cause amnesia, terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It can open
 doors, bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It
 regenerates quickly.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to cold and 
 poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 weapons, 
 armours, garments, adornments, magical devices, written items or treasures.  
 It can gaze to paralyze you for 6d1 damage, hit to hurt you for 4d10 damage, 
 hit to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from 
 you for 1d6 damage.  

The Elder elementalist  (Violet 'l')
=== Num:1224  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:1169  Ac:18  Exp:5700
A high-elven sorcerer clad in a shimmering gown that dances in every color of
 the rainbow.  The greatest of elemental magics are hers to command.  This elf
 mage is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves very quickly, but is 
 older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 27463.64 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her
 native depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce acid
 balls, produce lightning balls, produce fire balls, produce frost balls, 
 produce plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, recover mana, probe your weaknesses, 
 confuse or slow; 1 time in 2.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors and 
 bash down doors.  She needs lite to see you.  She is immune to acid, lightning
 , fire and cold.  She resists plasma and lite.  She cannot be charmed or slept
 .  She takes a while to see intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  
 She may carry up to 4 weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, 
 written items, musical items, potions, edible items or treasures.  She can hit
to electrify you for 1d12 damage, hit to dissolve you for 1d12 damage, hit to 
 burn you for 1d12 damage and hit to freeze you for 1d12 damage.  

The Coloss|us|us|usi|  (Light Green 'g')
=== Num:381  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:-10  Hp:2100  Ac:150  Exp:6000
An enormous construct resembling a titan made from stone.  It strides
 purposefully towards you, swinging its slow fists with earth-shattering power.
This creature is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves slowly, but is 
 larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 28909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not
 detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It
 can hit to hurt you for 8d15 damage and hit to hurt you for 8d15 damage.  

The Nightwing  (Blue Slate 'N')
=== Num:484  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1391  Ac:120  Exp:6100
Everywhere colours seem paler and the air chiller.  At the centre of the cold
 stands a mighty figure.  Its wings envelop you in the chill of death as the
 nightwing reaches out to draw you into oblivion.  Your muscles sag and your
 mind loses all will to fight as you stand in awe of this mighty being.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves quickly,
 but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 29390.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce nether balls, produce frost bolts, produce poison bolts, produce
 nether bolts, produce mana bolts, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon an
 undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors and fly over
 obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to 
 cold and poison.  It resists darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 3 good armours, adornments or written items.  It can 
 touch to poison you for 6d5 damage, touch to poison you for 6d5 damage, hit to
disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d8 damage and hit to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 6d8 damage.  

The Greater Maia  (Light Blue 'M')
=== Num:1153  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:692  Ac:68  Exp:6100
A great Maia whose physical form looks overpowering next to your own frail body.
This mix of elf and demon is normally found on dungeon level 43 and moves
 quickly.  Destruction of this creature is worth 29390.91 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce balls of light, produce holy orbs, 
 haste-self, recover mana, heal-self, cure-self, terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and pick up objects.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists nether, plasma, 
 nexus, disenchantment, magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands
 .  It cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit to hurt you for 8d5 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d5 damage and hit
to hurt you for 8d5 damage.  

The Spectral killer  (Violet 'G')
=== Num:1214  Lev:43  Rar:4  Spd:+5  Hp:311  Ac:30  Exp:6100
An eerie form moves toward you relentlessly.  One look in its eyes and you know
 that you cannot escape it.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 43 and moves quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 29390.91 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which 
 teleport to or cause mind blasting; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, pass
 through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 acid, cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It resists nether.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 5 garments, 
 tools, musical items, junk items or treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 6d7 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 6d7 damage.  

[U] One of the Nine  (Mustard 'W')
=== Num:457  Lev:43  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2322  Ac:70  Exp:120000
A tall black cloaked Ringwraith.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 43 and moves quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 578181.82 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.
He may wail to terrify you for 6d7 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also magical,
 casting spells which produce fire balls, produce fire bolts, produce nether
 bolts, recover mana, cure-self, cause wounds, summon a monster, terrify, blind
 or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is
 invisible.  He is cold blooded.  He is hurt by bright light.  He is immune to 
 fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly
 observant of intruders, which he may notice from 900 feet.  He may carry up to
 4 good weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  He
 can hit to hurt you for 14d7 damage, touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from
you for 6d7 damage and wail to terrify you for 6d7 damage.  It is a dungeon
 guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] the King of Water  (Blue 'E')
=== Num:422  Lev:43  Rar:7  Spd:+10  Hp:2100  Ac:80  Exp:270000
A towering water elemental king, he is master of all things liquid.  Wave after
 wave drowns your frail body.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level
 43 and moves a bit erratically and quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 1300909.09 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells which produce frost
 balls, produce water balls, produce ice bolts, produce water bolts, recover
 mana or summon monsters of the same group; 1 time in 4.  He can bash down doors
 and swim under water.  He is cold blooded.  He is not detected by telepathy.  
 He is hurt by water remover.  He is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  He
 resists water, blindness and blunt weapons.  He cannot be frightened, confused
 , charmed or slept.  He tends to overlook intruders, which he may notice from
 120 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He can hit to batter you for 6d5 
 damage, hit to batter you for 6d5 damage and hit to batter you for 6d5 damage.


The Ethereal hound  (Light Violet 'Z')
=== Num:495  Lev:44  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:384  Ac:100  Exp:1900
A pale green hound.  Pulsing red lines and strange fluorescent light hints at
 internal organs best left to the imagination.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 44 and moves quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 9327.27 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe nether; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 pass through walls and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  
 It lights up the surroundings.  It is invisible.  It resists nether.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can claw
to hurt you for 2d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 2d12 damage, bite to hurt you
for 2d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 2d12 damage.  

The Revenant  (Violet 's')
=== Num:527  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1073  Ac:75  Exp:6100
A skeletal form, around which the dead rise up in unlife...  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 44 and moves quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 29945.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  ; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which recover mana, blink-self, teleport-self, teleport-self to, teleport to, 
 curse you or cause wounds; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, bash down doors
 and pick up objects.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists 
 blindness and edged weapons.  It cannot be cut.  It takes quite a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 500 feet.  It may carry up to 3 weapons, 
 armours, adornments or treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 10d5 damage and 
 touch to drain mana from you for 5d5 damage, plus spell points.  

The Ancient chromatic dragon  (Violet 'A')
=== Num:1120  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:6100
A huge draconic form.  Many colours and shades ripple down its massive frame. 
 Few live to see another.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level
 44 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 29945.45 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning, fire or poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 lightning, fire and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry
 up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.


The Ranger Chieftain||ess|s|  (Light Green 'q')
=== Num:582  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:880  Ac:60  Exp:6300
A great leader among the Rangers.  Her understanding of nature gives her
 powerful elemental spells to use against you, in addition to her skills as an
 archer and a warrior.  Furthermore, she is a master of camouflage, so you will
 need magically enhanced seeing to spot her.  This woman warrior mage is
 normally found on dungeon level 44 and moves quickly, but is older or more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 30927.27
 points for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She
 may create an arrow to hurt you for 13d6 damage; 1 time in 1 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce frost balls, produce lightning bolts, 
 produce fire bolts, produce mana bolts, haste-self, blink-self or give
 invisibility; 1 time in 4.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  She needs lite to see you.  She is immune to 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 She is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She
 may carry up to 3 weapons, missile weapons, garments, lites, adornments, 
 magical devices, written items, potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt 
 you for 5d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d5 
 damage.  

The Marid  (Light Blue 'E')
=== Num:1237  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:546  Ac:50  Exp:6400
A powerful water elemental, it is eternally angered at humanity. Flee it while
 you can, for legends tell that a marid cannot be hurt by mere mortals.  This
 evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 44 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 31418.18 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce water bolts, recover mana or summon
 monsters of the same group; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors.  It is
 immune to cold, edged and blunt weapons.  It resists water.  It cannot be 
 stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry a good junk item or treasure.  It can 
 hit to hurt you for 5d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d6 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 5d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d6 damage.  

The Land dragon  (Umber 'D')
=== Num:1140  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:6500
It is a wingless dragon-like form, that shakes the ground as it moves.  This
 evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 44 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 31909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe fire or poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can pick up
 objects, dig through earth and rubble and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to acid and fire.  It resists nether.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it
 may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.
It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and 
 bite to batter you for 7d10 damage.  

The War dragon  (Mud 'D')
=== Num:1142  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:6500
It is a dragon-like form, festooned with spikes and the armor of war.  This
 evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 44 and moves quickly, but is 
 larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is
 worth 31909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may breathe acid or lightning powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can pick up
 objects, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  
 It is immune to acid and lightning.  It resists nether.  It cannot be confused
 , charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may
 notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and 
 bite to wound you for 7d10 damage.  

The Spirit lich|||es|  (Light Slate 'L')
=== Num:964  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+0  Hp:942  Ac:72  Exp:6900
It is an insubstantial skeletal form dressed in robes.  It radiates vastly evil
 power.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 44 and
 moves at normal speed, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 33872.73 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport to, incur wraithform, drain
 mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, 
 terrify, blind, slow or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, bash down
 doors and pass through walls.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 hurt by bright light.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists 
 nether and blunt weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3
garments, adornments, magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain 
 experience (by 40d6+) from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d8 damage and 
 touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d8 damage.  

The Phantom  (Light Purple 'G')
=== Num:378  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:245  Ac:30  Exp:7200
An unholy creature of darkness, the aura emanating from this evil being saps
 your very soul.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level
 44 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon
 .  Destruction of this creature is worth 35345.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which cause amnesia; 1 time in 5.  It can pass through walls and fly over
 obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons
 .  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to
 see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry one or two 
 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  It can touch to drain 
 experience (by 80d6+) from you, touch to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you, 
 claw to reduce intelligence from you for 1d10 damage and claw to reduce wisdom
 from you for 1d10 damage.  

The Legendary hobbit rogue  (Light Dark 'h')
=== Num:1221  Lev:44  Rar:4  Spd:+30  Hp:614  Ac:35  Exp:7200
Cunning and stealthy beyond belief, this infamous rascal could pick the pockets
 of Smaug himself.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 44 and
 moves incredibly quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 35345.45 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport-self to, 
 teleport to, create darkness, create traps, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  
 She can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects and easily evade blows
 and missiles.  She is not detected by telepathy.  She is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which she may notice from 250 feet.  She may carry up to 4 weapons, 
 missile weapons, armours, garments, tools, lites, written items, potions, 
 edible items or treasures.  She can hit to blind you for 4d11 damage, doubled
 against eye monsters, hit to paralyze you for 4d11 damage, touch to steal gold
 from you and touch to steal items from you.  

[U] Harowen the Black Hand  (Violet 't')
=== Num:491  Lev:44  Rar:6  Spd:+30  Hp:2050  Ac:90  Exp:22000
He is a master of disguise, an expert of stealth, a genius at traps, and moves
 with blinding speed.  Check your pockets!  This man thief is normally found on
 dungeon level 44 and moves incredibly quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 108000.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.
He may create a shot to hurt and poison you for 46d5 damage; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells which give invisibility, teleport-self to or 
 create traps; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors, bash down doors, pick up objects
 and hide in unusual places.  He is immune to poison.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from
 400 feet.  He may carry up to 6 good weapons, missile weapons, garments, tools
 , lites, adornments, musical items, potions or edible items.  He can touch to 
 steal gold from you for 5d5 damage, touch to steal items from you for 5d5 
 damage and hit to blind you for 18d5 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

[U] One of the Nine  (Violet 'W')
=== Num:464  Lev:44  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2752  Ac:70  Exp:140000
A tall black cloaked Ringwraith..  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 44 and moves quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 687272.73 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.
; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells which produce acid balls, 
 produce lightning balls, produce fire balls, produce frost balls, produce
 nether balls, cure-self, curse you, cause wounds, summon an undead, terrify, 
 blind or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is
 invisible.  He is cold blooded.  He is hurt by bright light.  He is immune to 
 fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly
 observant of intruders, which he may notice from 900 feet.  He may carry up to
 4 good weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  He
 can hit to hurt you for 8d7 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d7 damage and touch 
 to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 6d7 damage.  

The 10-headed hydra  (Light Dark 'y')
=== Num:1071  Lev:45  Rar:4  Spd:+15  Hp:1027  Ac:105  Exp:7100
A strange reptilian hybrid with ten heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 45 and moves very quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 35500.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may spit to blind you for 4d9 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters and may breathe acid; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells which produce acid balls, produce acid bolts, terrify
 or confuse; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid
 .  It resists blindness.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 treasures.  It can bite to 
 dissolve you for 5d9 damage, bite to dissolve you for 5d9 damage, bite to 
 dissolve you for 5d9 damage and spit to blind you for 4d9 damage, doubled
 against eye monsters.  

The Mystic  (Light Umber 'p')
=== Num:482  Lev:45  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:968  Ac:60  Exp:7300
A lady of all that is natural, skilled in the mystic ways.  She is a master of
 martial arts and is at one with nature, able to summon help from the wild if
 need be.  This woman shaman is normally found on dungeon level 45 and moves
 very quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 36500.00 points for a 1st level character.  She is 
 dangerous at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells which produce
 lightning balls, produce poison balls, produce sound balls, produce storm balls
 , produce ice bolts, produce water bolts, recover mana, cure-self, blink-self, 
 teleport-self to, incur heroism, summon a monster, summon insects, summon
 animals, summon hounds, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  She can open
 doors and bash down doors.  She is invisible.  She is immune to acid, 
 lightning and poison.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She may carry up
 to 4 weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, potions or 
 edible items.  She can punch to batter you for 2d10 damage, kick to hurt you 
 for 20d2 damage, hit to hurt and poison you for 20d1 damage and hit to 
 paralyze you for 15d1 damage.  

The Phantasm  (Purple 'G')
=== Num:844  Lev:45  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:353  Ac:45  Exp:7400
An unholy creature from beyond, half-real and half-nightmare. You are caught in
 the fever of dreams.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 45 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 37000.00 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which teleport to, cause wounds, cause hallucinations or blind
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can pass
 through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 280
 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  
 It can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you, hit to hurt you for 4d6 
 damage and claw to reduce intelligence from you for 2d10 damage.  

The Efreet  (Light Red 'E')
=== Num:1238  Lev:45  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:546  Ac:50  Exp:7500
A powerful fire elemental, it is eternally angered at humanity. Flee it while
 you can, for legends tell that an efreet cannot be hurt by mere mortals.  This
 evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 45 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 37500.00 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce fire balls, recover mana or summon monsters
 of the same group; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors.  It is immune to 
 fire, edged and blunt weapons.  It resists plasma.  It cannot be stunned, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 120 feet.  It may carry a good junk item or treasure.  It can hit 
 to hurt you for 6d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage, hit to hurt you 
 for 6d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage.  

The Nightcreeper  (White 'N')
=== Num:992  Lev:45  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:1242  Ac:140  Exp:7900
The shadows gather thicker and stronger, and an intense feeling of evil  crowds
 the air. Something slips from the shadows, a half formed serpertine  being,
 black as death, hissing and spitting a toxic night that leaves  you numb and
 worthless.  This evil undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 45 and
 moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 39500.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which produce nether balls, produce nether bolts, produce mana bolts, cause
 mind blasting, summon an undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can bash
 down doors.  It is invisible.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light
 .  It is immune to cold and poison.  It resists water, nether, nexus, 
 disenchantment and darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 one or two good armours, adornments or written items.  It can bite to hurt and
 poison you for 5d7 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 5d7 damage, crush 
 to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 8d9 damage and crush to drain 
 experience (by 40d6+) from you for 8d9 damage.  

The Elven shade  (Teal 'G')
=== Num:960  Lev:45  Rar:4  Spd:+20  Hp:548  Ac:25  Exp:8900
An elven figure that glows with an inner light.  This evil undead elf is
 normally found on dungeon level 45 and moves very quickly, but is more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 44500.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  She is dangerous at her native depth.  She may 
 shriek to reduce intelligence from you for 8d8 damage; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which invoke darkness storms, heal-self, 
 blink-self, teleport away, create darkness, drain mana, cause wounds, summon a
 monster, summon monsters of the same race, summon a demon, summon an undead, 
 blind or confuse; 1 time in 2.  She lights up the surroundings.  She is
 invisible.  She is cold blooded.  She is immune to blunt weapons.  She resists 
 nether and lite.  She cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  She
 is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may
 carry up to 3 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  She can touch to 
 drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 1d16 damage, touch to drain charges
 from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for
 8d8 damage and shriek to reduce intelligence from you for 8d8 damage.  

The Dao  (Light Umber 'E')
=== Num:1239  Lev:45  Rar:4  Spd:+10  Hp:546  Ac:50  Exp:8900
A powerful earth elemental, it is eternally angered at humanity. Flee it while
 you can, for legends tell that a dao cannot be hurt by mere mortals.  This
 evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 45 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is faster, more powerful or specialised deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 44500.00 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce shard balls, recover mana or summon
 monsters of the same group; 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors.  It is
 immune to acid, edged and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice
 from 120 feet.  It may carry a good junk item or treasure.  It can hit to hurt
you for 7d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 7d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 7d6 
 damage and hit to hurt you for 7d6 damage.  

The 11-headed hydra  (Light Blue 'y')
=== Num:469  Lev:45  Rar:5  Spd:+15  Hp:1209  Ac:110  Exp:9700
A strange reptilian hybrid with eleven heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 45 and moves very quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 48500.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may spit to blind you for 5d9 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters and may breathe acid or lightning; 1 time in 3
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce acid balls, produce
 lightning balls, produce acid bolts, produce lightning bolts, produce
 lightening beams, terrify or confuse; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, 
 can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to acid and lightning.  It resists blindness.  It takes a
 while to see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 treasures.  It can bite to dissolve you for 5d9 damage, bite to electrify 
 you for 5d9 damage, bite to dissolve you for 5d9 damage and spit to blind you 
 for 5d9 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Star dragon  (Light Yellow 'A')
=== Num:702  Lev:45  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:9900
A huge dragon emanating from the outer depths of space, this terrible dragon is
 a master of the stars.  Its form is of infinite void speckled with bright 
 burning points of light.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level
 45 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 49500.00 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.   and may breathe lightning, darkness, sound
 or force powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It resists 
 blindness and darkness.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut
 .  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It
 may carry up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for
 4d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 
 damage.  

[U] the Messenger of Khamul  (Mud 'W')
=== Num:474  Lev:45  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3280  Ac:90  Exp:150000
Once a powerful King among Men, he was enslaved by one of the Nine Rings and
 became one of the chief servants of Sauron.  This Ringwraith serves in Dol
 Goldur as the messenger of Khamul the Shadow of the East.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 45 and moves quickly.  Destroying
 this creature is worth 750000.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is over
 powered at his native depth.  ; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce fire balls, produce nether balls, recover mana, 
 cure-self, cause wounds, summon monsters, summon hounds, summon an undead, 
 terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors and bash down doors
 .  He is cold blooded.  He is hurt by bright light.  He is immune to fire, 
 cold and poison.  He resists darkness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 900
 feet.  He may carry up to 4 good weapons, armours, garments, adornments, 
 magical devices or potions.  He can hit to hurt you for 8d8 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 8d8 damage and bite to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for
 12d7 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Blade of Chaos  (Light Purple '|')
=== Num:1278  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:568  Ac:70  Exp:10000
A blade with no wielder you can see, shifting forms and glowing with chaos.  It
 radiates a deadly aura of change as it opens wounds across your body.  This
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves very quickly, but is 
 faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 50909.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.   and
 is also magical, casting spells which produce chaos balls, blink-self or cause
 wounds; 1 time in 4.  It can fly over obstacles.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 water, nether, nexus, blindness and chaos.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It is observant of intruders, which it may notice
 from 170 feet.  It may carry a special object or treasure.  It can hit to 
 wound you for 15d6 damage and hit to wound you for 15d6 damage.  

The Aether hound  (Light Violet 'Z')
=== Num:531  Lev:46  Rar:8  Spd:+10  Hp:984  Ac:100  Exp:11000
A shifting, swirling form.  It seems to be all colours and sizes and shapes,
 though the dominant form is that of a huge dog.  You feel very uncertain all of
 a sudden.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves quickly
 , but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 56000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native
 depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost, poison, plasma, light, 
 darkness, confusion, sound, shards, inertia, gravity, force, chaos, 
 disenchantment, nexus, nether or time; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors
 and track you unerringly over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists nether, plasma, nexus, 
 disenchantment, lite, darkness and chaos.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed, slept or cut.  It is ever vigilant for intruders, which it may notice
 from 300 feet.  It usually appears in groups.  It can claw to hurt you for
 3d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 3d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 3d12 
 damage and bite to hurt you for 3d12 damage.  

The Ancient emerald dragon  (Green 'A')
=== Num:698  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:11000
A huge draconic form.  The air hums with powerful elemental  force and you feel
 stunned just looking at it.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 46 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 56000.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may
 breathe poison or force powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

The Mummified king  (Light Violet 'z')
=== Num:1106  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1383  Ac:85  Exp:11000
A great and ancient king, arisen to reclaim his dominion.  This evil undead
 warrior is normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves quickly, but is larger
 or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 56000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe darkness or force powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce nether bolts, curse you, 
 cause wounds or summon similar monsters; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors, bash
 down doors and bore through walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to acid, cold and poison.  It resists nether and 
 darkness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It usually appears
 with escorts.  It may carry one or two good weapons, armours, adornments, 
 magical devices or treasures.  It can hit to infect you with disease for 4d8 
 damage, hit to infect you with disease for 4d8 damage and touch to poison you 
 for 4d7 damage.  

The Lesser titan  (Magenta-Pink 'P')
=== Num:433  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2016  Ac:80  Exp:12000
It is a humanoid figure thirty feet tall that gives off an aura of power and
 hate.  This evil giant is normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves quickly
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 61090.91 points for a 1st level character.
It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you; 1
 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which heal-self, 
 teleport to, summon monsters or terrify powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  It needs lite to see you.  It takes a while
 to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 4
 good chests, musical items, potions or edible items.  It can hit to batter you
 and hit to confuse you.  

The Dread lich|||es|  (Red 'L')
=== Num:451  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1512  Ac:80  Exp:12000
A skeletal form wrapped in robes.  Powerful magic crackles along its bony
 fingers.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 46 and
 moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 61090.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce lightning balls, recover mana, blink-self, 
 teleport to, drain mana, curse you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, give
 resistance to the elements, summon an undead, terrify, blind, confuse or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists edged weapons
 .  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders,
 which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 garments, adornments, 
 magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+)
 from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 2d12 damage and touch to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 2d12 damage.  

The Ancient diamond dragon  (White 'A')
=== Num:697  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:12000
A huge draconic form.  The awesome power of its magic  lights the dungon around
 you with crackles and sparks.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 46 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 61090.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may
 breathe frost or mana powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.
It is immune to cold.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to
 overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 
 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

The Sun dragon  (Light Yellow 'A')
=== Num:701  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:12000
A huge dragon emanating from the solar corona, this terrible dragon is  a
 master of the sun's energies.  Its form is too bright as it burns out your
 retinae.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves
 quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 61090.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.   and may breathe plasma, light or gravity powerfully; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, 
 blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  
 It can fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 lights up the surroundings.  It resists plasma and lite.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and 
 bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

The Blue Wizard  (Blue 'M')
=== Num:1154  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+15  Hp:1296  Ac:68  Exp:12000
A member of a society of wizards founded by Alatar and Pallandro, who journeyed
 into the far east of Middle-Earth.  They are powerful wizards who make
 formidable opponents in combat.  This elf mage is normally found on dungeon
 level 46 and moves very quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 61090.91 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is dangerous at her native depth.  She is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce balls of light, produce confusion balls, produce
 chaos balls, produce plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, produce mana bolts, 
 recover mana, heal-self, cure-self, teleport-self to, teleport to, teleport
 away, summon similar monsters, summon monsters, summon monsters of the same
 class or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  
 She can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  She lights up the
 surroundings.  She is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  She
 resists nether, plasma, nexus and disenchantment.  She cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  She prefers to ignore intruders,
 which she may notice from 300 feet.  She may carry up to 3 weapons, armours or 
 written items.  She can hit to hurt you for 5d6 damage, hit to hurt you for
 5d5 damage, hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage and hit to hurt you for 5d6 damage.


The Ancient garnet dragon  (Light Red 'A')
=== Num:1233  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:12000
A huge draconic form.  The fecundness of its diseased form  corrupts the dungon
 around you with a fetid and rank stench.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 46 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 61090.91 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may breathe disease powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.
It resists teleportation.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends
 to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7
chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

[U] the Watcher of Cirith Ungol  (Magenta-Pink 'g')
=== Num:641  Lev:46  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:5548  Ac:40  Exp:32000
It looks like a great figure seated upon a throne, with three joined bodies and
 three vulture-like heads.  It seems to be carved out of huge blocks of stone,
 immovable, and yet strangely aware of your presence.  The black stones of its
 eyes glitter with its dreadful will.  Visible or invisible, none shall pass by
 this guardian.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves
 quickly, but does not deign to chase intruders.  Destroying this creature is
 worth 162909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native
 depth.  It may gaze to terrify you for 5d8 damage, gaze to paralyze you for
 5d8 damage, shriek to reduce strength and size from you for 5d8 damage or gaze
to confuse you for 5d8 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 which drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, probe your weaknesses, 
 summon monsters or summon Greater Undead; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors
 .  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock
 remover.  It is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  It resists water and 
 nexus.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 420 feet.  It can gaze to 
 terrify you for 5d8 damage, gaze to paralyze you for 5d8 damage, shriek to 
 reduce strength and size from you for 5d8 damage and gaze to confuse you for
 5d8 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Draugluin, Sire of All Werewolves  (Deep Light Blue 'C')
=== Num:541  Lev:46  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:5740  Ac:90  Exp:49000
Draugluin provides Sauron with a fearsome personal guard.  He is an enormous
 wolf inhabited with a human spirit.  He is chief of all his kind.  This evil 
 animal is normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves a bit erratically and
 very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 249454.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He is magical, casting
 spells which incur beserk rage, summon monsters, summon hounds or terrify; 1
 time in 3.  He can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength, pick up objects and track you unerringly over land, but not through
 water.  He is immune to poison.  He pays little attention to intruders, which
 he may notice from 800 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry
 one or two good garments, edible items or junk items.  He can claw to hurt you
for 6d8 damage, claw to hurt you for 6d8 damage, bite to hurt and poison you 
 for 6d6 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for 6d6 damage.  It is a
 dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Gothmog, the Lieutenant of Morgul  (Green 'W')
=== Num:492  Lev:46  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3600  Ac:100  Exp:140000
This Ringwraith was once a mighty King among Men before being enslaved by one
 of the Nine Rings.  Now a servant of Sauron, he serves as the lieutenant of
 Minas Morgul under the Lord of the Nazgul.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 46 and moves quickly.  Destroying this creature
 is worth 712727.27 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his
 native depth.  He may wail to terrify you for 6d7 damage; 1 time in 3 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce frost balls, produce
 nether balls, produce frost bolts, cure-self, curse you, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds, summon an undead, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  He
 can open doors and bash down doors.  He is cold blooded.  He is hurt by bright
 light.  He is immune to cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 900
 feet.  He may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours, garments, adornments, 
 magical devices or potions.  He can hit to hurt you for 18d9 damage, touch to 
 drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 6d7 damage and wail to terrify you 
 for 6d7 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Mithril golem  (Light Blue 'g')
=== Num:318  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+0  Hp:1952  Ac:100  Exp:13000
It is a massive statue of purest mithril.  It looks expensive!  This creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 47 and moves at normal speed, but is larger
 , faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 67363.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It may create a spike to hurt you for 8d5 damage or lash to 
 wound you for 8d5 damage and may grow ammunition; 1 time in 3.  It can bash
 down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It resists 
 blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 120 feet.  It may carry
 up to 3 precious metals.  It can hit to hurt you for 8d5 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 8d5 damage and lash to wound you for 8d5 damage.  

The Undead beholder  (Umber 'e')
=== Num:459  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2160  Ac:100  Exp:14000
A beholder which has cheated death.  Black nether storms rage around the
 bloodshot pupil of its central giant eye, and light seems to bend as it sucks
 its power from the very air around it.  Your soul chills as it drains your
 vitality for its evil enchantments.  This evil undead creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 47 and moves quickly, but is larger, more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 72545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may gaze to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 3d6 damage, 
 gaze to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 3d6 damage or gaze to 
 reduce intelligence from you for 3d6 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also magical,
 casting spells which produce acid balls, produce fire balls, produce frost
 balls, produce mana bolts, produce nether beams, drain mana, cause mind
 blasting, cause wounds, probe your weaknesses, summon an undead, cause amnesia
 , confuse or slow; 1 time in 2.  It can bash down doors and communicate
 telepathically with its own kind.  It must fly and cannot move underwater or
 through webs.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs
 and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant
 of intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It can gaze to drain 
 experience (by 40d6+) from you for 3d6 damage, gaze to drain charges from your
 wands and staffs for 3d6 damage, gaze to reduce intelligence from you for 3d6 
 damage and bite to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 7d6 damage.  

The Beholder hive-mother  (Blue 'e')
=== Num:591  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2940  Ac:80  Exp:14000
A hive mother of the race of beholders, she can summon her brood to her aid
 whenever she wishes.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 47
 and moves quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 72545.45 points for a 1st level character.  She
 is dangerous at her native depth.  She may gaze to paralyze you for 5d5 damage
 , gaze to reduce intelligence from you for 5d5 damage or gaze to drain charges
 from your wands and staffs for 5d5 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce acid balls, produce fire balls, 
 produce frost balls, invoke darkness storms, produce nether bolts, produce
 mana bolts, drain mana, cause mind blasting, probe your weaknesses, summon
 similar monsters, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 2.  She
 can bash down doors and communicate telepathically with its own kind.  She
 must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  She is immune to poison.
She resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  She
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is fairly observant of intruders,
 which she may notice from 300 feet.  She can bite to drain experience (by
 80d6+) from you for 6d6 damage, gaze to paralyze you for 5d5 damage, gaze to 
 reduce intelligence from you for 5d5 damage and gaze to drain charges from 
 your wands and staffs for 5d5 damage.  

The Ancient amethyst dragon  (Violet 'A')
=== Num:696  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:14000
A huge draconic form.  It seems simultaneously old and young  while you feel
 the weight of years press down on you.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 47 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 72545.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may breathe acid or time powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 acid.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

The Ancient sapphire dragon  (Slate 'A')
=== Num:699  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:14000
A huge draconic form.  The weight of your armour drags you  down as its
 oppressive gravity overwhelms you.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 47 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 72545.45
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It
 may breathe lightning or gravity powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 lightning.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, 
 armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt 
 you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

The Ancient ruby dragon  (Red 'A')
=== Num:700  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:14000
A huge draconic form.  You... feel... yourself...  moving... slower...  This
 evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 47 and moves quickly.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 72545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe fire or inertia powerfully; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, 
 blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  
 It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It is immune to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept
 .  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 
 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.


The Night lich|||es|  (Blue Slate 'L')
=== Num:967  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1835  Ac:83  Exp:14000
A skeletal form wrapped in robes and cloaked in darkness.  Powerful magic
 crackles along its bony fingers.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 47 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 72545.45 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport to, create
 darkness, drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, give resistance to
 the elements, summon an undead, terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in
 3.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists nether, darkness and edged weapons.
It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 garments, adornments, 
 magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+)
 from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 2d13 damage and touch to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 2d13 damage.  

The Stone serpent  (Light Slate 'J')
=== Num:1219  Lev:47  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:393  Ac:65  Exp:14000
Deep beneath the surface burrow serpents that feed on gold; the very mountains
 tremble as their roots are smashed and shattered.  This creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 47 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is 
 larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 72545.45 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It can bash
 down doors and bore through walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is rarely detected
 by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to fire, poison and 
 edged weapons.  It is observant of intruders, which it may notice from 140
 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It may carry one or two exceptional 
 treasures.  It can bite to wound you for 4d10 damage and crush to shatter you 
 for 10d10 damage.  

The Ethereal dragon  (Light Violet 'D')
=== Num:463  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:15000
A huge dragon emanating from the ethereal plane, this terrible dragon is a
 master of light and dark.  Its form disappears from sight as it cloaks itself
 in unearthly shadows.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 47
 and moves quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 77727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous
 at its native depth.  It may breathe light, darkness or confusion powerfully;
 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 pass through walls, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not
 through water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is invisible.  It resists 
 lite and darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, 
 claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

The Vision  (Magenta-Pink 'G')
=== Num:845  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:430  Ac:60  Exp:15000
A creature of the darkest terrors of night, all claws and fangs and chains and
 knives.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 47 and
 moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 77727.27 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to poison you 
 for 5d7 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 teleport-self, drain mana, cause wounds, cause amnesia, cause hallucinations
 or blind powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can 
 pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 250
 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage, gaze to poison you for 5d7 damage, claw
to hurt you for 2d10 damage and bite to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you 
 for 2d10 damage.  

The Ancient multi-hued dragon  (Violet 'A')
=== Num:462  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:16000
A huge draconic form.  Many colours and shades ripple down its massive frame. 
 Few live to see another.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level
 47 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 82909.09 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 acid, lightning, fire, frost or poison powerfully; 1 time in 4 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind, confuse or slow
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice
 from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours or adornments.  It can 
 claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d10 damage and bite to
hurt you for 7d10 damage.  

The Bile Demon  (Slate 'U')
=== Num:568  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2296  Ac:90  Exp:16000
It's big.  It's fat.  It's red.  It's ugly.  It's got a severe attack of highly
 poisonous flatulence.  And its insides are corrosive.  All of which go together
 to make the single most repulsive sight - and smell - you have ever experienced.
This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 47 and moves quickly, but is 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 82909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may spit to reduce constitution from you for 7d6 damage or create a
 dart to poison you and may breathe acid or poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and
 is also magical, casting spells which summon a demon, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and pick up objects.  It is immune to acid, lightning and 
 poison.  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  
 It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 3 good 
 weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit to hurt you for 16d8 damage, 
 vomit to dissolve you for 9d9 damage and spit to reduce constitution from you 
 for 7d6 damage.  

The Delerium  (Violet 'G')
=== Num:846  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:477  Ac:80  Exp:17000
You have not dreamed such a dark and terrible evil, boiling forth with images
 of hideous destruction.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 47 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 88090.91 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to 
 space out you for 5d6 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 which cause mind blasting, cause amnesia, cause hallucinations, terrify, blind
 or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It
 can pass through walls and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, 
 charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice
 from 220 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, tools, musical items or junk
 items.  It can hit to hurt you for 5d6 damage, gaze to space out you for 5d6 
 damage, claw to blast you with chaos for 2d4 damage and bite to blast you with
 chaos for 3d4 damage.  

The Death lich|||es|  (White 'L')
=== Num:968  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2153  Ac:86  Exp:17000
A skeletal form wrapped in robes and cloaked in darkness.  Powerful magic
 crackles along its bony fingers.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 47 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 88090.91 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which blink-self, teleport to, create darkness, 
 drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, give resistance to the elements
 , summon an undead, terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 lightning, cold and poison.  It resists nether and edged weapons.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 garments, adornments, magical
 devices or written items.  It can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from 
 you, touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 2d14 damage and touch to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 2d14 damage.  

The Istar  (Yellow 'M')
=== Num:1155  Lev:47  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:1296  Ac:140  Exp:17000
A member of an order of Maiar who came to middle-Earth in the third age. The
 Istari are powerful wizards who are quick to join together in combat to crush
 their enemies.  This elf mage is normally found on dungeon level 47 and moves
 very quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 88090.91 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may gaze to terrify 
 you for 4d4 damage or gaze to terrify you for 4d4 damage; 1 time in 2 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce balls of light, 
 produce plasma bolts, produce water bolts, produce mana bolts, recover mana, 
 cure-self, teleport to, summon similar monsters, summon monsters of the same
 class, terrify or blind powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time
 in 2.  It can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  It lights up
 the surroundings.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists nether, plasma, nexus and disenchantment.  It cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It prefers to ignore intruders, which
 it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 9 good weapons, armours or 
 written items.  It can gaze to terrify you for 4d4 damage, gaze to terrify you
for 4d4 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 8d6 
 damage.  

[U] Ar-Pharazon the Golden  (Yellow 't')
=== Num:611  Lev:47  Rar:7  Spd:+20  Hp:3640  Ac:45  Exp:53000
Last and proudest king of ancient Numenor. Corrupted by power and avarice, he
 fell victim to Sauron's wiles, tried to fight the Valar themselves, and
 condemned Numenor to oblivion.  This evil man is normally found on dungeon
 level 47 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 274636.36
 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He
 is magical, casting spells intelligently which heal-self, teleport away, 
 summon similar monsters or summon monsters; 1 time in 5.  He can carry a lite
 to see you, open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  He needs lite to
 see you.  He is immune to lightning, fire and poison.  He prefers to ignore
 intruders, which he may notice from 300 feet.  He may carry up to 5
 exceptional weapons, garments, tools, lites, adornments, musical items, 
 potions or edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 8d8 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 8d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 8d8 
 damage.  

[U] the Watcher in the Water  (Light Teal 'F')
=== Num:639  Lev:47  Rar:8  Spd:+10  Hp:2095  Ac:75  Exp:110000
A huge many-tentacled creature, this is the Kraken of Moria.  Its tentacles are
 luminous and slimy green, and an inky stench comes from its foul bulk.  It was
 accidentally released from its prison by the Dwarves when Durin's Bane, the
 Balrog of Khazad-dum, was awakened.  This evil creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 47 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 570000.00
 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It
 may breathe darkness powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce water balls, teleport to, create darkness, 
 cause wounds, probe your weaknesses, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and 
 swim under water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire and poison.  It
 resists darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry one
 or two good garments, edible items or junk items.  It can crush to hurt you 
 for 16d12 damage, crush to hurt you for 16d12 damage, crush to hurt you for
 16d12 damage and crush to hurt you for 16d12 damage.  It is a dungeon
 guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Nightwalker  (Light Dark 'N')
=== Num:512  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:1155  Ac:175  Exp:17000
A huge giant garbed in black, more massive than a titan and stronger than a
 dragon.  With terrible blows, it breaks your armour from your back, leaving you
 defenseless against its evil wrath.  It can smell your fear, and you in turn
 smell the awful stench of death as this ghastly figure strides towards you
 menacingly.  This evil undead giant is normally found on dungeon level 48 and
 moves very quickly, but is larger, more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 89636.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which invoke darkness storms, produce nether balls, 
 produce frost bolts, produce poison bolts, produce nether bolts, produce mana
 bolts, produce nether beams, cause mind blasting, summon similar monsters, 
 summon an undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors and bash
 down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists darkness.  It cannot be confused
 , charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 good armours, adornments or written items
 .  It can hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 10d10 damage, hit to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 10d10 damage, hit to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 8d8 damage and hit to disenchant your armour and weapons
for 8d8 damage.  

The Great Terror Wyrm  (Light Teal 'A')
=== Num:704  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2100  Ac:150  Exp:17000
A dragon of great size and power. Its polished silver scales reflect the 
 terror in your eyes, and you find it hard not to throw down your weapon and
 flee screaming from certain death.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 48 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 89636.36
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.   and
 may breathe frost or fear powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.
It is immune to cold.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may
 carry up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you 
 for 4d12 damage, claw to wound you for 4d12 damage and bite to terrify you for
 6d14 damage.  

The 12-headed hydra  (Light Green 'y')
=== Num:1072  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:1386  Ac:115  Exp:17000
A strange reptilian hybrid with twelve heads.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 48 and moves very quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 89636.36 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may spit to freeze you for 5d9 damage
 and may breathe fire, frost, plasma or nexus powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is
 also magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, produce frost balls, 
 produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, produce plasma bolts or produce
 nether bolts; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is immune to fire and cold.  It resists lava, plasma, nexus
 and blindness.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from
 300 feet.  It may carry up to 7 treasures.  It can bite to burn you for 7d9 
 damage, bite to freeze you for 7d9 damage, bite to burn you for 7d9 damage and 
 spit to freeze you for 5d9 damage.  

The Dreadmaster  (Yellow 'G')
=== Num:471  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:960  Ac:100  Exp:18000
It is an unlife of power almost unequaled.  An affront to existence, its very
 touch abuses and disrupts the flow of life, and its unearthly limbs, of purest
 black, crush rock and flesh with ease.  This evil undead creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 48 and moves a bit erratically and quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 94909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 nether beams, push through floor or ceiling, drain mana, cause wounds, summon
 an undead, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 8.  It can pass through walls
 , pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune
 to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, 
 slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry up to 6 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  
 It can hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 6d6 damage and hit 
 to reduce strength and size from you for 6d4 damage.  

The Great Storm Wyrm  (Light Blue 'A')
=== Num:489  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:18000
A vast dragon of power.  Storms and lightning crash around its titanic form. 
 Deep blue scales reflect the flashes and highlight the creature's great
 muscles.  It regards you with contempt.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 48 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 94909.09
 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.   and
 may breathe lightning powerfully; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to lightning.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 4d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 4d12 damage and bite to electrify you for 4d24 
 damage.  

The Great Ice Wyrm  (Deep Light Blue 'A')
=== Num:496  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:18000
An immense dragon capable of awesome destruction.  You have never felt such
 extreme cold, or witnessed such an icy stare.  Begone quickly or feel its wrath!
This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 48 and moves quickly.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 94909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is dangerous at its native depth.   and may breathe frost powerfully; 1 time
 in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to cold.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice
 from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It
 can claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage and 
 bite to freeze you for 4d24 damage.  

The Nightcrawler  (Deep Light Blue 'N')
=== Num:498  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1708  Ac:160  Exp:18000
This intensely evil creature bears the form of a gargantuan black worm.  Its
 gaping maw is a void of blackness, acid drips from its steely hide.  It is like
 nothing you have ever seen before, and a terrible chill runs down your spine as
 you face it.  This evil undead insect is normally found on dungeon level 48
 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 94909.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, poison
 or nether; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce nether balls, produce nether bolts, produce mana bolts, cause mind
 blasting, summon an undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to fire
 , cold and poison.  It resists nether and darkness.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice
 from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 good armours, adornments or written items
 .  It can sting to reduce constitution from you for 8d8 damage, sting to 
 reduce constitution from you for 8d8 damage, bite to dissolve you for 10d10 
 damage and crush to dissolve you for 10d16 damage.  

The Great Bile Wyrm  (Teal 'A')
=== Num:578  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:18000
A huge and very powerful dragon.  Great steaming pools of acid drip from its
 form onto the ground.  You shudder when you see the acid eating away the very
 stones of the dungeon - what could it do to you?  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 48 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 94909.09 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.   and may breathe acid powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good chests, armours or 
 adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, claw to hurt you for
 4d12 damage and bite to dissolve you for 6d14 damage.  

The Fallen||||  (Mustard 'M')
=== Num:455  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:1296  Ac:140  Exp:19000
This Maia sided with Melkor during the battles at the start of the world and
 was cast out and fell with him. Abandoned by Melkor after the fall, he exacts
 his retribution on everything that falls in his path.  This mix of elf and 
 demon is normally found on dungeon level 48 and moves very quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 100181.82 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It may gaze to terrify you 
 for 4d4 damage or gaze to terrify you for 4d4 damage; 1 time in 3 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce lightning balls, produce
 balls of light, produce mana bolts, produce holy orbs, recover mana, teleport
 to, cause mind blasting, summon similar monsters, terrify or blind powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors, bash down
 doors and pick up objects.  It is immune to acid, lightning, cold and poison.  
 It resists magical spells, the effects of rods, staffs and wands and blunt
 weapons.  It prefers to ignore intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  
 It may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or written items.  It can gaze to 
 terrify you for 4d4 damage, gaze to terrify you for 4d4 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 8d6 damage and hit to hurt you for 8d6 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of the Nexus  (Blue Slate 'A')
=== Num:703  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2100  Ac:150  Exp:19000
A dragon of great size and power. Its polished copper scales reflect the  light
 in twisted and shifting shapes, and you find it hard to stay in  one place as
 you battle to save yourself.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 48 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 100181.82 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.   and may
 breathe lightning or nexus powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 lightning.  It resists nexus.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may
 carry up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you 
 for 4d12 damage, claw to wound you for 4d12 damage and bite to blast you with
 nexus for 6d14 damage.  

The Nether lich|||es|  (Light Green 'L')
=== Num:969  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2460  Ac:90  Exp:19000
A skeletal form wrapped in robes and cloaked in darkness.  Powerful magic
 crackles along its bony fingers.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 48 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised
 deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 100181.82 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce nether bolts, blink-self, 
 teleport to, create darkness, drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, 
 give resistance to the elements, summon an undead, terrify, blind, confuse or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists nether and 
 edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 garments, 
 adornments, magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain 
 experience (by 80d6+) from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d15 damage and 
 touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d15 damage.  

The Great Brass Wyrm  (Mud 'A')
=== Num:705  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2100  Ac:150  Exp:20000
A dragon of great size and power. Its polished brass scales drain magic from
 the surrounding air, and you find it hard to find anything to sustain you in
 this deadly melee.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 48 and
 moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 105454.55 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.   and may breathe acid
 or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid.  It resists 
 disenchantment.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 4d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 4d12 damage and bite to disenchant your armour
 and weapons for 6d14 damage.  

The Great Hell Wyrm  (Magenta-Pink 'A')
=== Num:506  Lev:48  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2660  Ac:150  Exp:21000
A vast dragon of immense power.  Fire leaps continuously from its huge form. 
 The air around it scalds you.  Its slightest glance burns you, and you truly
 realize how insignificant you are.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 48 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 110727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.
 and may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting
 spells intelligently which terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention
 to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good 
 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 4d12 damage and bite to burn you for 6d24 damage.  

[U] Maeglin, the Traitor of Gondolin  (Light Dark 'l')
=== Num:595  Lev:48  Rar:7  Spd:+20  Hp:4560  Ac:120  Exp:77000
The son of Eol the Dark Elf, Maeglin is every bit as evil as his father and
 more.  His greed for gold led him to betray the Hidden Kingdom of Gondolin to
 Morgoth's forces.  He is a mighty warrior himself, and some of Morgoth's
 greatest servants answer to his call.  This evil elf is normally found on
 dungeon level 48 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 406000.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native
 depth.  He is magical, casting spells which summon monsters, summon Ancient
 Dragons, summon Greater Demons, summon Unique Monsters, summon Greater Undead
 or summon Ring Wraiths; 1 time in 5.  He can open doors, bash down doors and 
 bore through walls.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may
 notice from 700 feet.  He may carry up to 7 exceptional weapons, missile
 weapons, garments, lites, adornments, written items, musical items, potions or 
 edible items.  He can hit to hurt you for 8d8 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d8 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 8d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 8d8 damage.  It
 is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] the Shadow of Caradhras, the Mountain  (Blue Slate 'P')
=== Num:1272  Lev:48  Rar:8  Spd:+5  Hp:2280  Ac:120  Exp:90000
A foreboding shadow of the greatest peak of the Misty Mountains.  Even at this
 distance, its terrible strength drives you back with wintry blasts and furious
 blows.  This evil giant is normally found on dungeon level 48 and moves
 quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 474545.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at
to hurt you for 20d10 damage and may breathe wind; 1 time in 5 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce wind balls, produce storm
 balls or produce ice bolts; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, bore through
 walls and pick up objects.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune to acid, 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it
 may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 3 good chests, musical items, 
 potions or edible items.  It can hit to shatter you for 13d7 damage and hit to
confuse you for 13d7 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress
 further.  

The Great Swamp Wyrm  (Light Teal 'A')
=== Num:576  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:22000
A truly enormous dragon with great powers.  The foul gases issuing from the
 beast nearly make you vomit; and while you may try to hold your breath as you
 fight it, it sees no reason to do likewise.  This evil dragon is normally
 found on dungeon level 49 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 118000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.   and may breathe poison powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 4d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 4d12 damage and bite to hurt and poison you for
 6d24 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Thunder  (Mustard 'A')
=== Num:579  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:22000
A dragon of gigantic proportions, with destructive abilities to match.  The
 sheer loudness of its roar leaves you stunned and unable to think clearly
 enough to defend yourself adequately.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 49 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 118000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.   and may breathe poison or sound powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also
 magical, casting spells which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 poison.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to batter you for 4d12 
 damage, claw to batter you for 4d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 6d24 
 damage.  

The Emperor lich|||es|  (Violet 'L')
=== Num:970  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2835  Ac:95  Exp:22000
A skeletal form wrapped in robes and ancient reliqury.  Powerful magic crackles
 along its bony fingers.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 49 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper
 in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 118000.00 points for a
 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce nether bolts, blink-self, teleport
 to, create darkness, drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, give
 resistance to the elements, summon similar monsters, summon an undead, terrify
 , blind, confuse or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 3.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists nether, disenchantment and 
 edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 garments, 
 adornments, magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain 
 experience (by 80d6+) from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d16 damage and 
 touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d16 damage.  

The Hellion  (Light Red 'U')
=== Num:467  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1800  Ac:50  Exp:23000
It is a massive humanoid demon wreathed in flames.  This evil demon is normally
 found on dungeon level 49 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 123363.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may lash to burn you and may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 4
 and is also magical, casting spells which produce chaos balls, produce cone of
 hellfire, incur heroism, summon a demon, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can open doors, bash down doors and 
 fly over obstacles.  It lights up the surroundings.  It is immune to lightning
 , fire and cold.  It resists lava, darkness, magical spells and the effects of
 rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 5 good weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit to burn you for
 8d12 damage, crush to hurt you for 3d12 damage and lash to burn you.  

The Drolem  (Green 'g')
=== Num:472  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1850  Ac:130  Exp:23000
A constructed dragon, the drolem has massive strength.  Powerful spells weaved
 during its creation make it a fearsome adversary.  Its eyes show little
 intelligence, but it has been instructed to destroy all it meets.  This dragon
 is normally found on dungeon level 49 and moves quickly, but is larger, faster
 or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 123363.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is dangerous at its native
 depth.  It may create a spike to hurt and poison you and may grow ammunition
 and may breathe poison powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells which blind, confuse or slow powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  
 It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It takes quite a while
 to see intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It can claw to hurt you 
 for 3d10 damage, claw to hurt you for 3d10 damage and bite to hurt and poison 
 you for 10d10 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Shadow  (Blue Slate 'A')
=== Num:443  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:1680  Ac:100  Exp:24000
A dragon-shaped shadow wielding soul-rending Night.  As it draws near, panic
 threatens to overwhelm you.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 49 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 128727.27 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 nether powerfully; 1 time in 4 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which create darkness, terrify, confuse or slow powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 4.  It can pass through walls, 
 pick up objects and track you over land, but not through water.  It is
 invisible.  It is immune to cold.  It resists nether and darkness.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to 7 chests, armours or 
 adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 2d14 damage, claw to terrify you for
 2d14 damage, bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 3d14 damage and 
 bite to paralyze you for 3d14 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Perplexity  (Light Umber 'A')
=== Num:577  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:24000
A dragon of great size and power.  Its polished bronze scales reflect the light
 in strange and confusing patterns, and you find it hard to keep your mind on
 the job of fighting for your life.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 49 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 128727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.
 and may breathe fire or confusion powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good 
 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 4d12 damage and bite to confuse you for 6d14 damage.  

The Ent  (Light Green ':')
=== Num:1279  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:3040  Ac:120  Exp:24000
A treeherd; a sentient, moving tree. His wrath is fearsome!  This creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 49 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 128727.27 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his
 native depth.  .  He can open doors, bash down doors and pick up objects.  He
 resists blunt weapons.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice
 from 300 feet.  He may carry up to 4 good potions.  He can crush to hurt you 
 for 13d11 damage, crush to hurt you for 13d11 damage and crush to hurt you for
 13d11 damage.  

The Jabberwock  (Purple 'J')
=== Num:517  Lev:49  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:2400  Ac:125  Exp:26000
"Beware the Jabberwock, my son! The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!"  Run
 and run quickly, for death incarnate chases behind you!  This animal is
 normally found on dungeon level 49 and moves very quickly, but is more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 139454.55 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 chaos; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain
 strength.  It resists chaos.  It prefers to ignore intruders, which it may
 notice from 350 feet.  It may carry one or two garments, edible items or junk
 items.  It can claw to wound you for 10d10 damage, claw to wound you for 10d10 
 damage, bite to hurt you for 10d10 damage and bite to hurt you for 10d10 
 damage.  

[U] Baldor the Hapless  (Yellow 'L')
=== Num:528  Lev:49  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:4150  Ac:85  Exp:57000
The eldest son of Brego, second King of Rohan.  At the feast held to celebrate
 the completion of Meduseld, he made a rash vow to tread the Paths of the Dead. 
 There he died and rose as one of the Dead, for the Paths are closed to all save
 the Dead and the heirs of Isildur.  This evil undead creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 49 and moves very quickly.  Destroying this creature is
 worth 305727.27 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his
 native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 nether balls, invoke mana storms, produce mana bolts, blink-self, teleport to, 
 create traps, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon similar monsters, 
 summon monsters, summon an undead, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 1.  
 He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is cold blooded.  He is immune to 
 cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He tends to
 overlook intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears
 with escorts.  He may carry up to 7 exceptional garments, adornments, magical
 devices or written items.  He can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from 
 you for 8d12 damage, touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs for
 8d12 damage and touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 8d12 damage
 .  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Greater titan  (Light Pink 'P')
=== Num:477  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2850  Ac:125  Exp:27000
A forty foot tall humanoid that shakes the ground as it walks.  The power
 radiating from its frame shakes your courage, its hatred inspired by your
 defiance.  This evil giant is normally found on dungeon level 50 and moves
 quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 147272.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may throw a boulder at to 
 hurt you; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 heal-self, teleport to, summon monsters or terrify powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2.  It can carry a lite to see you, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  It needs lite to see you.  It takes a while
 to see intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 6
 exceptional chests, musical items, potions or edible items.  It can hit to 
 batter you and hit to confuse you.  

The Grand Master mystic  (Orange 'p')
=== Num:493  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:1848  Ac:80  Exp:29000
She is one of the few true masters of the art, being extremely skillful in all
 forms of unarmed combat and controlling the world's natural creatures with
 disdainful ease.  This woman shaman is normally found on dungeon level 50 and
 moves very quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 158181.82 points for a
 1st level character.  She is deadly at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells which produce lightning balls, produce poison balls, produce
 sound balls, produce storm balls, produce plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, 
 produce water bolts, recover mana, heal-self, cure-self, blink-self, give
 invisibility, teleport-self to, teleport to, incur heroism, summon monsters, 
 summon hounds, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  She can open doors
 and bash down doors.  She is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.
She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is observant of intruders, which
 she may notice from 300 feet.  She may carry up to 3 exceptional weapons, 
 armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, potions or edible items.  
 She can kick to batter you for 20d2 damage, punch to batter you for 10d2 
 damage, hit to hurt and poison you for 20d1 damage and punch to paralyze you 
 for 15d1 damage.  

The Elder vampire  (Red 'V')
=== Num:596  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:2460  Ac:90  Exp:29000
A terrible robed undead figure, this creature has existed in its unlife for
 many centuries by stealing the life of others.  It can summon the very shades
 of its victims from beyond the grave to come enslaved to its aid.  This evil
 undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 50 and moves quickly, but
 is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 158181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells which produce nether bolts, 
 incur wraithform, create darkness, drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause
 wounds, summon an undead, terrify or paralyze; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and pass through walls.  It is invisible.  It is cold
 blooded.  It regenerates quickly.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune
 to fire, cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 up to 5 good weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices, written
 items or treasures.  It can hit to hurt you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you 
 for 4d6 damage, bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 5d6 damage
 and bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 5d6 damage.  

The Great Inertia Wyrm  (Mud 'A')
=== Num:1160  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+15  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:29000
A massive dragon that seems to be hardly moving at all as it charges at you
 with deadly menace.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 50
 and moves very quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 158181.82 points for
 a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 inertia powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which terrify, confuse or slow powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 300
 feet.  It may carry up to 9 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw 
 to hurt you for 4d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, bite to hurt 
 you for 6d14 damage and bite to hurt you for 6d14 damage.  

The Sorcere|r|ss|rs|  (Light Purple 'q')
=== Num:1034  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:4576  Ac:60  Exp:30000
A human figure in robes, she moves with magically improved speed, and her hands
 are ablur with spell casting. You stagger at the mighty sound of her spells as
 they echo hollowly through the dungeon.  This evil woman mage is normally
 found on dungeon level 50 and moves very quickly, but is older or more powerful
 deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 163636.36 points for
 a 1st level character.  She is deadly at her native depth.  She is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce fire balls, produce frost balls, 
 produce poison balls, produce balls of light, produce confusion balls, produce
 sound balls, produce chaos balls, invoke mana storms, produce acid bolts, 
 produce mana bolts, produce cone of force, haste-self, recover mana, 
 blink-self, teleport-self, teleport to, create traps, cause wounds, create a
 shield, give resistance to the elements, probe your weaknesses, summon a
 monster, summon monsters of the same class, summon a dragon, summon Ancient
 Dragons, summon an undead, summon Greater Undead, cause hallucinations, 
 terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 1.  She can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  She needs lite to see you.  She resists 
 disenchantment.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She is fairly
 observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may carry up
 to 4 good weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical devices, written items
 , potions or edible items.  She can hit to hurt you for 6d8 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 6d8 damage and hit to hurt you for 6d8 damage.  

The Hammer of the Underworld  (Light Dark '\')
=== Num:1223  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:735  Ac:55  Exp:30000
A maul thrice as large as a man and many times more massive, with a
 spectre-shimmer of dreadful magics surrounding it.  It smites and smashes down,
 pulverizes and mangles in heaps of rubble, blood, and bone.  Appalling and
 horrific sight!  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 50 and moves
 very quickly, but is faster deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 163636.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It can bore through walls, fly over obstacles and 
 communicate telepathically with its own kind.  It is not detected by
 telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists water, 
 nether, nexus, blindness and chaos.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may
 notice from 180 feet.  It can hit to batter you.  

The Osyluth  (Light Slate 'U')
=== Num:569  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:2210  Ac:75  Exp:32000
It is a demon made almost entirely out of bones.  It is humanoid, but with a
 large tail similar to that of a giant scorpion, and emits a foul smell of decay
 and rot.  They are despised even in the hells.  This evil demon is normally
 found on dungeon level 50 and moves very quickly, but is more powerful or 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 174545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.
It is magical, casting spells which produce lightning balls, produce frost balls
 , produce ice bolts, summon a demon or terrify powerfully enough to overcome
 your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is
 invisible.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 good weapons, armours or 
 written items.  It can hit to reduce charisma from you for 6d6 damage, hit to 
 reduce charisma from you for 6d6 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 8d8 
 damage and sting to reduce strength and size from you for 5d5 damage.  

The Great Crystal Wyrm  (Light Pink 'A')
=== Num:1159  Lev:50  Rar:5  Spd:+15  Hp:2450  Ac:150  Exp:32000
A huge crystalline dragon.  Its skin is composed of thousands of razor-sharp
 silver plates.  Strange colours ripple through it as it moves in the light.  
 This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 50 and moves very quickly.
A kill of this creature is worth 174545.45 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe shards powerfully; 1 time in
 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It lights up the surroundings.  It resists edged weapons.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it
 may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 9 good chests, armours or 
 adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage, claw to hurt you for
 4d12 damage, bite to hurt you for 6d14 damage and bite to hurt you for 6d14 
 damage.  

The Dracolisk  (Light Red 'D')
=== Num:478  Lev:50  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2660  Ac:120  Exp:33000
A mixture of dragon and basilisk, the dracolisk stares at you with deep
 piercing eyes, its evil breath burning the ground where it stands.  This evil
 mix of animal and dragon is normally found on dungeon level 50 and moves
 quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 180000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It may gaze to petrify you and may breathe fire or nexus
 powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which terrify or paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid and fire.  
 It resists nexus.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to
 4 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage
 , bite to hurt you for 4d12 damage, bite to burn you for 7d14 damage and gaze 
 to petrify you.  

The Aetheroi  (Violet 'f')
=== Num:1227  Lev:50  Rar:7  Spd:+20  Hp:1766  Ac:40  Exp:33000
Radiant predator of the Ethereal Plains, it bounds in rainbows across the vault
 of the sky.  Brilliantly it shines; to look at it is blindness.  Its roar is
 thunder; its onrush, a whirlwind.  It is one of the Lions of Heaven, and its
 fangs are flawless diamonds.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 50
 and moves very quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 180000.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is over powered at its native depth.  It may breathe light, sound or wind;
 1 time in 10.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It lights up the surroundings.  
 It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning and fire.  It
 resists plasma and lite.  It cannot be stunned, frightened or confused.  It is
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It usually appears
 with a friend.  It may carry one or two exceptional treasures.  It can bite to
wound you, bite to blind you for 5d20 damage, doubled against eye monsters and 
 claw to batter you for 5d20 damage.  

The Bone golem  (White 'g')
=== Num:608  Lev:50  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:170  Exp:35000
A skeletal form, black as night, constructed from the bones of its previous
 victims.  This undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 50 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 190909.09 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 which produce nether balls, teleport to, drain mana, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds or summon an undead; 1 time in 6.  It can bash down doors.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to lightning, 
 fire, cold and poison.  It resists edged weapons.  It cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It can hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for
 8d8 damage, hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 8d8 damage, hit to 
 reduce strength and size from you for 6d6 damage and hit to reduce strength
 and size from you for 6d6 damage.  

[U] Oikeroi, Bodyguard of Tevildo  (Violet 'f')
=== Num:642  Lev:50  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:3360  Ac:200  Exp:57000
A fierce and warlike cat, serving as a bodyguard of Tevildo.  This giant cat
 looks down upon you with disdain.  This evil creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 50 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 310909.09 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.
He is magical, casting spells which teleport to or summon similar monsters; 1
 time in 3.  He can bash down doors and track you over land, but not through
 water.  He is invisible.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may
 notice from 1000 feet.  He usually appears with a friend.  He may carry up to 4
 good garments, adornments or junk items.  He can hit to confuse you for 12d12 
 damage, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d12 damage, hit to
blind you for 10d5 damage, doubled against eye monsters and hit to paralyze you
for 15d1 damage.  

[U] Umuiyan, Doorkeeper of Tevildo  (Violet 'f')
=== Num:643  Lev:50  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:3360  Ac:200  Exp:57000
A giant cat, and servant of Tevildo.  His yellow eyes look upon you with a
 baleful stare.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 50 and
 moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 310909.09 points for a 1st
 level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He is magical, casting
 spells which teleport to or summon similar monsters; 1 time in 3.  He can bash
 down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  He is invisible.  
 He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.
He usually appears with a friend.  He may carry up to 4 good garments, 
 adornments or junk items.  He can hit to confuse you for 12d12 damage, touch 
 to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d12 damage, hit to blind you for
 10d5 damage, doubled against eye monsters and hit to paralyze you for 15d1 
 damage.  

The Phoenix  (Red 'B')
=== Num:1156  Lev:51  Rar:5  Spd:+15  Hp:2664  Ac:130  Exp:37000
A massive glowing eagle bathed in flames.  The searing heat chars your skin and
 melts your armour.  This animal is normally found on dungeon level 51 and
 moves very quickly, but is older or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 205181.82 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe fire, plasma or light; 1 time
 in 2 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, produce
 fire bolts, produce plasma bolts or summon similar monsters; 1 time in 2.  It
 can open doors, bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It
 must fly and cannot move underwater or through webs.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire and poison.  It resists 
 lava, plasma and lite.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which it may notice from 600 feet.  It may carry up to
 3 good adornments or junk items.  It can peck to wound you for 12d6 damage, 
 peck to wound you for 12d6 damage, hit to burn you for 9d12 damage and hit to 
 burn you for 9d12 damage.  

The Gaunt reaver  (Green 'L')
=== Num:973  Lev:51  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:170  Exp:39000
A humanoid form,  black as night, advancing steadily and unstoppably, even the
 very rock of the dungeon cannot prevent it reaching you.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 51 and moves quickly, but is more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 216272.73 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.
It is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce nether balls, invoke
 mana storms, teleport to, drain mana, curse you, cause mind blasting, cause
 wounds, cause hunger, summon an undead, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 3
 .  It can open doors, bash down doors and bore through walls.  It is cold
 blooded.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists nether, 
 nexus, darkness and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may
 carry up to 5 good garments, adornments, magical devices or written items.  It
 can hit to eat your food for 6d8 damage, hit to starve you for 6d8 damage, hit
to reduce strength and size from you for 4d6 damage and hit to reduce 
 constitution from you for 4d6 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Law  (Umber 'A')
=== Num:520  Lev:51  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3150  Ac:170  Exp:41000
A massive dragon of powerful intellect.  It seeks to dominate the universe and
 despises all other life.  It sees all who do not obey it as mere insects to be
 crushed underfoot.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 51 and
 moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 227363.64 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.   and may breathe sound or 
 shards powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which summon a dragon, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly
 over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune
 to cold.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays very
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry
 up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 5d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to batter you for 7d14 
 damage.  

The Night reaver  (Deep Light Blue 'L')
=== Num:972  Lev:51  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:170  Exp:43000
A humanoid form,  black as night, advancing steadily and unstoppably, even the
 very rock of the dungeon cannot prevent it reaching you.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 51 and moves quickly, but is more
 powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 238454.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.
It is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce frost balls, invoke
 darkness storms, produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, teleport to, drain
 mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon an undead, blind, confuse or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors, bash down doors and bore through
 walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It
 resists nether, nexus, darkness and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from
 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 good garments, adornments, magical devices or 
 written items.  It can hit to blind you for 6d8 damage, doubled against eye
 monsters, hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d8 damage, hit to 
 reduce intelligence from you for 4d6 damage and hit to reduce wisdom from you 
 for 4d6 damage.  

The Nightrunner  (Umber 'N')
=== Num:993  Lev:51  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:1617  Ac:160  Exp:43000
Swift as night, this four-legged monstrosity in death runs in massive leaps and
 bounds towards you, shaking the dungeon with the force of its  footsteps. Its
 iron hard teeth and claws nash furiously, and then it  unleashes a dreadful
 howl, cutting through the flesh of your trembling  body to pierce your very
 soul.  This evil undead animal is normally found on dungeon level 51 and moves
 very quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 238454.55 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce nether balls, produce nether bolts, produce mana
 bolts, haste-self, cause mind blasting, summon an undead, terrify or blind; 1
 time in 4.  It can bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright
 light.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists water, 
 nether, nexus, disenchantment and darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200
 feet.  It may carry up to 4 good armours, adornments or written items.  It can 
 claw to disenchant your armour and weapons for 11d11 damage, claw to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 11d11 damage, bite to drain experience
 (by 80d6+) from you for 8d8 damage and bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from
you for 8d8 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Chaos  (Light Purple 'A')
=== Num:519  Lev:51  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3150  Ac:170  Exp:45000
A massive dragon of changing form.  As you watch, it appears first fair and
 then foul.  Its body is twisted by chaotic forces as it strives to stay real. 
 Its very existence distorts the universe around it.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 51 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 249545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its
 native depth.   and may breathe chaos or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 3
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which summon a dragon, 
 terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire.  It resists disenchantment
 and chaos.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 5d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to space out you for 7d14 
 damage.  

The Nighthunter  (Light Umber 'N')
=== Num:994  Lev:51  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:1988  Ac:180  Exp:47000
Patient as death, this felinoid terror pads silently towards you, carving the
 air with its sleek and terrible strides. Its steely teeth and claws flex and
 retract with a deadly beauty, but the dreadful and unliving  force with which
 it hunts you will end only with your extermination.  This evil undead animal
 is normally found on dungeon level 51 and moves very quickly, but is larger or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 260636.36 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.
It is magical, casting spells intelligently which invoke darkness storms, 
 produce nether balls, produce nether bolts, produce mana bolts, cause mind
 blasting, summon an undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 4.  It can bash down
 doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is hurt by bright light.  It is immune to 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists water, nether, nexus, 
 disenchantment and darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It is
 observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to
 4 good armours, adornments or written items.  It can claw to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 12d12 damage, claw to disenchant your armour and weapons
for 12d12 damage, bite to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 9d9 
 damage and bite to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 9d9 damage.  

[U] Thuringwethil, the Vampire Messenger  (Violet 'V')
=== Num:505  Lev:51  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:3550  Ac:145  Exp:54000
Chief messenger between Sauron and Morgoth, she is surely the most deadly of
 her vampire race.  At first she is charming to meet, but her wings and eyes
 give away her true form.  This evil undead creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 51 and moves very quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 299454.55 points for a 1st level character.  She is deadly at her native
 depth.  She is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce nether balls
 , incur wraithform, drain mana, curse you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, 
 summon similar monsters, summon Greater Undead, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1
 time in 2.  She can open doors, bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  She
 is cold blooded.  She regenerates quickly.  She is hurt by bright light.  She
 is immune to cold and poison.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She
 is fairly observant of intruders, which she may notice from 200 feet.  She may
 carry up to 7 good weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices or 
 written items.  She can bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 6d6 
 damage, bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 6d6 damage, hit to 
 confuse you for 6d6 damage and hit to confuse you for 6d6 damage.  

[U] Durin's Bane, the Balrog of Khazad-dum  (Violet 'U')
=== Num:483  Lev:51  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:2400  Ac:100  Exp:180000
A huge Balrog surrounded by raging pillars of fire, he is indeed a terrible
 opponent.  The dark figure holds in its right hand a sword like a stabbing
 tongue of fire and a flaming whip of many thongs in its left.  This Balrog was
 entombed beneath Baranzibar for many years until the dwarves of Khazad-dum,
 while extending their mithril-mine, roused it from its sleep.  It is known as
 Durin's Bane, the slayer of Durin VI, Lord of Moria.  Your death is at hand.  
 This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 51 and moves very quickly.  
 Destroying this creature is worth 998181.82 points for a 1st level character.  
 He is over powered at his native depth.  He may lash to burn you for 12d12 
 damage and may breathe fire powerfully; 1 time in 2 and is also magical,
 casting spells which summon a demon, summon an undead, terrify or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors
 , bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  He is immune to acid, fire and 
 poison.  He resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  
 He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He pays little attention to
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears with
 escorts.  He may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or written items.  He can 
 hit to burn you for 17d12 damage, lash to burn you for 12d12 damage and touch 
 to drain charges from your wands and staffs.  It is a dungeon guardian,
 impeding your progress further.  

The Shadow breeder  (Blue Slate 'S')
=== Num:1222  Lev:52  Rar:11  Spd:+10  Hp:686  Ac:15  Exp:8300
The darkness gathers, heaves, and out loom the taloned legs and hairy face of
 an enormous Unlit spider.  It craves the darkness, and breeds everywhere the
 shadows lie.  This insect is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves a bit
 erratically and quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 46781.82 points for a 1st level character.  It is over
 powered at its native depth.   and may breathe darkness; 1 time in 4.  It can 
 bash down doors.  It is invisible.  It is rarely detected by telepathy.  It
 breeds explosively.  It appears in a giant web.  It is hurt by bright light.  
 It resists darkness.  It cannot be confused.  It is observant of intruders,
 which it may notice from 250 feet.  It usually appears with a friend.  It can 
 crawl to absorb light from you for 5d1 damage, sting to blind you for 2d9 
 damage, doubled against eye monsters and sting to paralyze you for 2d9 damage.


The Black reaver  (Light Dark 'L')
=== Num:524  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3150  Ac:170  Exp:53000
A humanoid form,  black as night, advancing steadily and unstoppably, even the
 very rock of the dungeon cannot prevent it reaching you.  This evil undead
 creature is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves quickly, but is more
 powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature
 is worth 298727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its
 native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 lightning balls, produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, teleport to, drain
 mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon an undead, blind, confuse or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors, bash down doors and bore through
 walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It
 resists darkness and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed, slept or 
 cut.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 5 good garments, adornments, magical devices or written items.
It can hit to hurt you for 5d12 damage, hit to disenchant your armour and
 weapons for 6d8 damage, hit to reduce strength and size from you for 4d6 
 damage and hit to reduce constitution from you for 4d6 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Stastis  (Light Purple 'A')
=== Num:710  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:53000
A massive dragon, one of the mightiest of dragonkind.  Time has stopped around
 it. It has travelled from between the space of seconds to destroy you.  This
 evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves quickly.  A kill of
 this creature is worth 298727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 deadly at its native depth.   and may breathe fire, inertia or time powerfully
 ; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which summon a
 dragon, summon Ancient Dragons, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 fire.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It prefers to ignore
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good 
 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 5d12 damage, claw
to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to slow you with inertia for 7d12 damage.


The Grey reaver  (Slate 'L')
=== Num:971  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2450  Ac:170  Exp:54000
A humanoid form,  dull grey and expressionless, advancing steadily and
 unstoppably, even the very rock of the dungeon cannot prevent it reaching you.
This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves
 quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 304363.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at
 its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 fire balls, produce frost balls, produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, 
 teleport to, drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon an undead, 
 blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors, bash down doors
 and bore through walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  It resists nether, nexus, darkness and edged weapons.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 good garments, adornments, 
 magical devices or written items.  It can hit to disenchant your armour and
 weapons for 6d8 damage, hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d8 
 damage, hit to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 4d6 damage and hit to
reduce charisma from you for 4d6 damage.  

The Great Ethereal Wyrm  (Orange 'A')
=== Num:1162  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+15  Hp:3150  Ac:175  Exp:54000
A powerful wyrm with control over light and dark, the ethereal wyrm's eyes
 glare with white hatred from the shadows.  This evil dragon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 52 and moves very quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 304363.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.
It may breathe light or darkness powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can pass through walls, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is invisible.  It resists lite and darkness.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it
 may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 9 good chests, armours or 
 adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 6d10 damage, claw to hurt you for
 6d10 damage, bite to hurt you for 8d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 8d12 
 damage.  

The Dracolich|||es|  (Light Green 'A')
=== Num:476  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2660  Ac:120  Exp:55000
The skeletal form of a once-great dragon, enchanted by magic most perilous. 
 Its animated form strikes with speed and drains life from its prey to satisfy
 its hunger.  This evil undead dragon is normally found on dungeon level 52 and
 moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 310000.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe lightning or 
 nether powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which teleport to, terrify or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, pick up objects
 , fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is
 cold blooded.  It is immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists nether
 and edged weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It may carry up to
 4 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage
 , claw to hurt you for 4d12 damage and bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from
you for 7d14 damage.  

The Demilich|||es|  (Mud 'L')
=== Num:557  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2560  Ac:100  Exp:59000
A lich who is partially immaterial, on its way to a new, ethereal form.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves quickly,
 but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of
 this creature is worth 332545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is 
 deadly at its native depth.  It is magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 heal-self, blink-self, teleport-self, teleport to, incur wraithform, drain mana
 , cause mind blasting, cause wounds, give resistance to the elements, summon a
 demon, summon an undead, cause amnesia, terrify, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1
 time in 3.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to lightning, cold and poison.  It resists edged and blunt weapons.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 3 good garments, adornments, 
 magical devices or written items.  It can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+)
 from you, touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce 
 dexterity and agility from you for 4d12 damage and touch to reduce dexterity
 and agility from you for 4d12 damage.  

The 13-headed hydra  (Light Slate 'y')
=== Num:1073  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:1558  Ac:120  Exp:59000
A strange reptilian hybrid with thirteen heads.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 52 and moves very quickly, but is larger deeper in the dungeon
 .  A kill of this creature is worth 332545.45 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may spit to blind you for
 6d9 damage, doubled against eye monsters and may breathe plasma, confusion, 
 inertia, gravity or chaos powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting
 spells which produce confusion balls, produce chaos balls, produce plasma bolts
 , blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.
It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and 
 poison.  It resists lava, blindness and chaos.  It cannot be confused.  It
 takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It may
 carry up to 9 treasures.  It can bite to confuse you for 8d9 damage, bite to 
 paralyze you for 8d9 damage, bite to space out you for 8d9 damage and spit to 
 blind you for 6d9 damage, doubled against eye monsters.  

The Great Wyrm of Corruption  (Light Pink 'A')
=== Num:1234  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:59000
A massive dragon, one of the mightiest of dragonkind.  It has undisputed
 mastery of the magic around you. It has travelled through the great mana flows
 beyond space to destroy you.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 52 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 332545.45 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.   and may
 breathe poison, nexus or disease powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which summon a dragon, summon Ancient Dragons, 
 terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1
 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over
 land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to poison.  It
 resists nexus and teleportation.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 prefers to ignore intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry
 up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 5d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to infect you with disease 
 for 7d12 damage.  

The Kraken  (Deep Light Blue 'F')
=== Num:1273  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2095  Ac:75  Exp:60000
A huge many-tentacled creature, long forgotten but rising from the endless
 depths. An inky stench comes from its foul bulk, and its massive arms reach out
 to crush you and drag you below.  This evil creature is normally found on
 dungeon level 52 and moves quickly, but is larger or more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 338181.82 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is deadly at its native depth.  It may breathe darkness
 powerfully; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce water balls, teleport to, create darkness, cause wounds, probe
 your weaknesses, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors and swim under water.  It is
 immune to acid, lightning, fire and poison.  It resists darkness.  It cannot
 be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which
 it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry one or two good garments, edible
 items or junk items.  It can crush to hurt you, crush to hurt you, crush to 
 hurt you and crush to hurt you.  

The Great Wyrm of Many Colours  (Violet 'A')
=== Num:523  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:64000
A gigantic dragon whose scales shimmer in myriad hues.  This evil dragon is
 normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 360727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at
 its native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost or poison
 powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which summon a dragon, summon Ancient Dragons, terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  It pays very little attention to intruders, which it may
 notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments
 .  It can claw to burn you for 5d12 damage, claw to freeze you for 5d12 damage
 , claw to electrify you for 5d12 damage and bite to dissolve you for 7d14 
 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Magic  (Purple 'A')
=== Num:707  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:64000
A massive dragon, one of the mightiest of dragonkind.  It has undisputed
 mastery of the magic around you. It has travelled through the great mana flows
 beyond space to destroy you.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon
 level 52 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 360727.27 points
 for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.   and may
 breathe frost, disenchantment or mana powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which summon a dragon, summon Ancient
 Dragons, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to 
 cold.  It resists disenchantment, magical spells and the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It prefers to
 ignore intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 7
 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 5d12 damage, 
 claw to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to drain charges from your wands
 and staffs for 7d12 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Balance  (Violet 'A')
=== Num:521  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:65000
A massive dragon, one of the mightiest of dragonkind.  It is thousands of years
 old and seeks to maintain the Cosmic Balance.  It sees you as an upstart
 troublemaker without the wisdom to control your actions.  It will destroy you.
This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves quickly.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 366363.64 points for a 1st level character.  It
 is over powered at its native depth.   and may breathe sound, shards, chaos or 
 disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which summon a dragon, summon Ancient Dragons, terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to fire and cold.  It resists disenchantment and chaos.  
 It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It pays very little
 attention to intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to
 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 5d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to hurt you for 7d14 damage
 .  

The Great Wyrm of Time and Space  (Light Violet 'A')
=== Num:706  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:65000
A massive dragon, one of the mightiest of dragonkind.  It is thousands of 
 years old and newly hatched simultaneously. It has travelled through all of
 time to destroy you.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 52
 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 366363.64 points for a
 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.   and may
 breathe acid, darkness, nexus or time powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which summon a dragon, summon Ancient
 Dragons, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to acid and cold.  It
 resists nexus and darkness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It
 prefers to ignore intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry
 up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound you for 5d12 
 damage, claw to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to take you back in time 
 for 7d12 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of the Galaxy  (Blue 'A')
=== Num:709  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:65000
A massive dragon, one of the mightiest of dragonkind.  It can crush worlds in
 its might grip of gravity. It has travelled from the event horizon of blackhole
 to destroy you.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 52 and
 moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth 366363.64 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It may breathe 
 lightning, plasma, light, darkness or gravity powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which summon a dragon, summon
 Ancient Dragons, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track
 you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to lightning, fire and 
 cold.  It resists plasma, blindness, lite and darkness.  It cannot be confused
 , charmed or slept.  It prefers to ignore intruders, which it may notice from
 400 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can 
 claw to wound you for 5d12 damage, claw to wound you for 5d12 damage, bite to 
 blast you with plasma for 7d12 damage and bite to blast you with plasma for
 7d14 damage.  

[U] Tevildo, Prince of Cats  (Violet 'f')
=== Num:516  Lev:52  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:3360  Ac:200  Exp:76000
Master of all things feline and mighty servant of Morgoth.  A great cat,
 coal-black and evil to look upon.  His eyes are long and very narrow and
 slanted, and gleam both red and green.  His great grey whiskers are as stout
 and sharp as needles.  His purr is like the roll of drums and his growl like
 thunder.  This creature is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves very
 quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 428363.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells
 which teleport to or summon similar monsters; 1 time in 3.  He can open doors, 
 bash down doors and track you over land, but not through water.  He is
 invisible.  He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from
 1000 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 4 good 
 garments, adornments or junk items.  He can claw to confuse you for 12d12 
 damage, claw to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 2d12 damage, claw to
blind you for 10d5 damage, doubled against eye monsters and bite to paralyze 
 you for 15d1 damage.  

[U] the Queen of Air  (Light Green 'E')
=== Num:468  Lev:52  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:2430  Ac:50  Exp:480000
A towering air elemental queen, she avoids your blows with her extreme speed.  
 This creature is normally found on dungeon level 52 and moves a bit
 erratically and very quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth 2705454.55
 points for a 1st level character.  She is deadly at her native depth.  ; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce lightning balls, 
 produce frost balls, produce wind balls, produce lightning bolts, recover mana
 or summon monsters of the same group; 1 time in 5.  She can bash down doors, 
 fly over obstacles and easily evade blows and missiles.  She is cold blooded.  
 She is not detected by telepathy.  She is immune to acid, lightning, cold, 
 poison and blunt weapons.  She resists blindness.  She cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  She tends to overlook intruders, which she may
 notice from 120 feet.  She usually appears with escorts.  She can hit to 
 batter you for 4d6 damage, hit to batter you for 4d6 damage and hit to confuse
you for 8d4 damage.  

The Gelugon  (White 'U')
=== Num:570  Lev:53  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:2800  Ac:100  Exp:74000
This demon from the ice planes is a truly terrifying sight.  It has an
 extremely large, insect-like body towering a full twelve feet tall, with great
 claws on its hands and pincers on its mouth, and its head bulges with great
 multi-faceted eyes.  Its tail is covered with razor-sharp spikes.  This evil 
 demon is normally found on dungeon level 53 and moves very quickly, but is 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 423818.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is over
 powered at its native depth.  It may breathe frost or shards powerfully; 1
 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce frost balls, 
 produce ice bolts, summon Greater Demons, terrify, slow or paralyze powerfully
 enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors and bash
 down doors.  It regenerates quickly.  It is immune to acid, lightning and cold
 .  It resists magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It
 cannot be confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 4 good 
 weapons, armours or written items.  It can claw to freeze you for 6d8 damage, 
 claw to freeze you for 6d8 damage, bite to freeze you for 9d9 damage and hit 
 to paralyze you for 5d5 damage.  

The 14-headed hydra  (Violet 'y')
=== Num:1074  Lev:53  Rar:6  Spd:+25  Hp:1702  Ac:130  Exp:76000
A strange reptilian hybrid with fourteen heads.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 53 and moves incredibly quickly, but is larger deeper in the
 dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth 435272.73 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It may spit to blind you 
 for 6d9 damage, doubled against eye monsters and may breathe plasma, light, 
 darkness, confusion, sound, shards, chaos, disenchantment or nexus powerfully;
 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells which produce balls of light, 
 invoke darkness storms, produce confusion balls, produce sound balls, produce
 chaos balls, produce water bolts, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough
 to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2.  It can bash down doors, can eat
 bodies to regain strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It
 is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists lava, plasma, 
 nexus, disenchantment, blindness, lite, darkness and chaos.  It cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It takes a while to see
 intruders, which it may notice from 350 feet.  It may carry up to 9 treasures.
It can bite to confuse you for 8d9 damage, bite to space out you for 8d9 damage
 , bite to terrify you for 8d9 damage and spit to blind you for 6d9 damage,
 doubled against eye monsters.  

The Eye Tyrant  (Violet 'e')
=== Num:1163  Lev:53  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:5460  Ac:80  Exp:80000
A beholder of great size and age, floating in the air.  Her gaze seems to shred
 your soul and her spells crush your will.  She is ancient, his history steeped
 in forgotten evils, her atrocities numerous and sickening.  This evil creature
 is normally found on dungeon level 53 and moves very quickly, but is older, 
 more powerful or specialised deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature
 is worth 458181.82 points for a 1st level character.  She is over powered at
 her native depth.  She may gaze to disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d6 
 damage, gaze to drain charges from your wands and staffs for 6d6 damage or 
 gaze to reduce intelligence from you for 6d6 damage; 1 time in 1 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which produce acid balls, produce fire
 balls, produce frost balls, invoke darkness storms, produce nether balls, 
 produce mana bolts, drain mana, cause mind blasting, probe your weaknesses, 
 summon similar monsters, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 1
 .  She can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and communicate telepathically
 with its own kind.  She is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  She resists 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  She cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  She is fairly observant of
 intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She can gaze to disenchant 
 your armour and weapons for 6d6 damage, gaze to drain charges from your wands
 and staffs for 6d6 damage, gaze to reduce intelligence from you for 6d6 damage
 and bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 8d8 damage.  

The Minotaur |lord|lady|lords|  (Magenta-Pink 'H')
=== Num:1157  Lev:53  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:3572  Ac:120  Exp:81000
A fearsome bull-headed monster, she swings a mighty axe as she curses all that
 defy her.  This evil creature is normally found on dungeon level 53 and moves
 very quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 463909.09 points for a 1st level character.  She is over
 powered at her native depth.  She may lash to wound you or create a crossbow
 bolt to hurt you and may breathe force; 1 time in 5 and is also magical,
 casting spells which produce lightning balls, produce plasma bolts, produce
 mana bolts or slow; 1 time in 5.  She can bash down doors and track you over
 land, but not through water.  She is immune to fire and poison.  She resists 
 plasma.  She cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  She takes quite a
 while to see intruders, which she may notice from 300 feet.  She may carry up
 to 3 good missile weapons, garments, adornments, edible items or junk items.  
 She can trample to hurt you, hit to wound you and lash to wound you.  

[U] Khamul the Shadow of the East  (Slate 'W')
=== Num:494  Lev:53  Rar:5  Spd:+10  Hp:4000  Ac:100  Exp:390000
Once a great warrior-King of the East, the Black Easterling is second in
 command of the fell Nazgul.  His great power and skill in combat is superseded
 only by that of the Lord of Morgul himself.  This evil undead creature is
 normally found on dungeon level 53 and moves quickly.  Destroying this creature
 is worth 2233636.36 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his
 native depth.  ; 1 time in 1 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce fire balls, produce frost balls, produce nether balls, produce
 mana bolts, recover mana, cure-self, push through floor or ceiling, curse you, 
 cause wounds, summon Greater Undead, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 1.  
 He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is cold blooded.  He is hurt by 
 bright light.  He is immune to acid, fire, cold and poison.  He resists 
 darkness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant of
 intruders, which he may notice from 900 feet.  He may carry up to 7 good 
 weapons, armours, garments, adornments, magical devices or potions.  He can 
 hit to hurt you for 9d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 9d10 damage and touch to 
 drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 14d7 damage.  

[U] the Sorcerer of Dol Goldur  (Light Purple 'q')
=== Num:645  Lev:54  Rar:5  Spd:+20  Hp:5600  Ac:100  Exp:58000
A mysterious and evil sorcerer, wrapped in black robes and with a burning gaze.
 Some whisper that his power is as great as Sauron's.  This evil man is
 normally found on dungeon level 54 and moves very quickly.  Killing this
 creature is worth 337454.55 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at
 his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 fire balls, invoke darkness storms, produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, 
 produce water balls, produce plasma bolts, teleport to, create traps, cause
 wounds, summon monsters, summon Ancient Dragons, summon Greater Demons or 
 paralyze; 1 time in 1.  He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is
 invisible.  He is immune to lightning, fire and cold.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 600 feet.  He may carry up to 6 good weapons, garments, lites, adornments
 , magical devices, written items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d8 damage, hit to disenchant your
 armour and weapons for 6d8 damage, hit to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs for 5d5 damage and hit to drain charges from your wands and staffs for
 5d5 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Grima Wormtongue, Agent of Saruman  (Yellow 'q')
=== Num:514  Lev:54  Rar:5  Spd:+15  Hp:4000  Ac:100  Exp:69000
He is a pathetic sniveling wretch. He has been spying for Saruman.  This evil 
 man is normally found on dungeon level 54 and moves very quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 401454.55 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 deadly at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce acid balls, produce fire balls, produce frost balls, produce water
 balls, produce ice bolts, haste-self, recover mana, heal-self, teleport-self, 
 give invisibility, teleport away, create traps, cause mind blasting, cause
 wounds, summon monsters, summon Ancient Dragons, summon a demon, summon an
 undead, cause amnesia, terrify or blind; 1 time in 1.  He can carry a lite to
 see you, open doors and bash down doors.  He needs lite to see you.  He is
 immune to lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.
He may carry up to 7 exceptional weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical
 devices, written items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to disenchant 
 your armour and weapons for 6d8 damage, hit to drain mana from you for 6d8 
 damage, plus spell points, hit to hurt you for 5d5 damage and hit to hurt you 
 for 5d5 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Dreadlord  (Red 'G')
=== Num:515  Lev:54  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:2100  Ac:150  Exp:84000
It is a massive form of animated death, its colour deeper than black.  It
 drinks in light, and space around it is twisted and torn by the weight of its
 evil.  It is unlife and it knows nothing but the stealing of souls and the
 stench of death.  Flee its hunger!  This evil undead creature is normally
 found on dungeon level 54 and moves quickly, but is more powerful deeper in
 the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 488727.27 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells which produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, produce nether
 beams, blink-self, teleport-self, teleport to, drain mana, cause mind blasting
 , summon an undead, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 4.  It can pass
 through walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  
 It is immune to cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It cannot be stunned, 
 confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It is fairly observant of intruders, which
 it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 7 garments, tools, musical
 items or junk items.  It can hit to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for
 6d6 damage, hit to drain experience (by 40d6+) from you for 6d6 damage, hit to
reduce strength and size from you for 4d6 damage and hit to reduce strength and
 size from you for 4d6 damage.  

The Pit Fiend  (Orange 'U')
=== Num:572  Lev:54  Rar:6  Spd:+20  Hp:3040  Ac:120  Exp:85000
Appearing as a giant, clawed and winged humanoid with a scaly red body and
 massive fangs dripping a foul green liquid, the Pit Fiend is a dreadful enemy
 from the lowest depths of the hells.  They are often the commanders of vast
 demon armies.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 54 and moves
 very quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this
 creature is worth 494545.45 points for a 1st level character.  It is over
 powered at its native depth.  It may breathe fire, poison or chaos powerfully;
 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce fire balls, 
 cause wounds, summon Ancient Dragons, summon Greater Demons or terrify
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It regenerates quickly.  It is
 immune to acid, fire and poison.  It resists chaos, magical spells and the
 effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may
 carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or written items.  It can claw to burn you
for 6d10 damage, claw to burn you for 6d10 damage, bite to hurt and poison you 
 for 5d10 damage and bite to reduce constitution from you for 5d10 damage.  

The Minor Death  (Light Dark 'G')
=== Num:847  Lev:54  Rar:6  Spd:+10  Hp:1728  Ac:140  Exp:88000
It is implacable, inescapable, and yet only a shadow of its true master.  This
 evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 54 and moves quickly.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 512000.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which teleport to, push through floor or ceiling, drain
 mana, cause mind blasting or cause wounds; 1 time in 5.  It can pass through
 walls, pick up objects and fly over obstacles.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 immune to acid, cold, poison and blunt weapons.  It resists water, nether, 
 nexus and darkness.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  
 It is fairly observant of intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 6 garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  It can hit to
wound you for 18d6 damage, touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you and 
 touch to reduce all stats from you.  

The Balrog  (Violet 'U')
=== Num:573  Lev:54  Rar:7  Spd:+20  Hp:3600  Ac:140  Exp:100000
Originally of the semi-divine Maia, this evil spirit swore allegiance to
 Morgoth at the beginning of time and is now one of his most terrible demonic
 servants.  With its flaming whip and sword it seeks to destroy you.  This evil
demon is normally found on dungeon level 54 and moves very quickly, but is 
 specialised deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 581818.18 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native
 depth.  It may lash to burn you for 7d12 damage and may breathe fire, plasma
 or darkness powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 produce fire balls, produce chaos balls, produce plasma bolts, produce cone of
 hellfire, summon a demon, summon Greater Demons, terrify, confuse or paralyze
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors
 , bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  It is immune to lightning, fire and 
 poison.  It resists lava, plasma, darkness, magical spells and the effects of
 rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  It pays
 little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry
 up to 7 good weapons, armours or written items.  It can hit to hurt you, lash 
 to burn you for 7d12 damage and touch to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs.  

The Great Aether Wyrm  (Light Violet 'A')
=== Num:1161  Lev:54  Rar:7  Spd:+15  Hp:2450  Ac:160  Exp:110000
An awesome wyrm of pure magic.  It seems to be all colours and sizes and
 shapes, though the dominant form is that of a great dragon.  This evil dragon
 is normally found on dungeon level 54 and moves very quickly.  A kill of this
 creature is worth 640000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is over
 powered at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost, 
 poison, plasma, light, darkness, confusion, sound, shards, inertia, gravity, 
 force, chaos, disenchantment, nexus, nether, time or mana powerfully; 1 time
 in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 water, nether, lava, plasma, nexus, disenchantment, lite, darkness, chaos, 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be 
 stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 9 good 
 chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to hurt you for 5d10 damage, claw 
 to hurt you for 5d10 damage, bite to hurt you for 8d12 damage and bite to hurt
you for 8d12 damage.  

[U] the Mouth of Sauron  (Purple 'q')
=== Num:538  Lev:55  Rar:7  Spd:+30  Hp:5700  Ac:120  Exp:69000
The Mouth of Sauron is a mighty spell caster.  So old that even he cannot
 remember his own name, his power and evil are undeniable.  He believes
 unshakeably that he is unbeatable and laughs as he weaves his awesome spells.  
 This evil undead man is normally found on dungeon level 55 and moves
 incredibly quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth 407727.27 points for a
 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He may gaze to drain 
 experience (by 80d6+) from you for 5d5 damage, gaze to drain experience (by
 80d6+) from you for 5d5 damage or insult to do you no effect; 1 time in 3 and
 is also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce nether balls, 
 produce water balls, produce ice bolts, produce mana bolts, teleport to, curse
 you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon Greater Undead, terrify or slow
 ; 1 time in 1.  He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is cold blooded.  
 He is immune to fire, cold and poison.  He resists blindness.  He cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  He pays little attention to
 intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry up to 7
 exceptional weapons, garments, lites, adornments, magical devices, written
 items, potions or edible items.  He can gaze to drain experience (by 80d6+)
 from you for 5d5 damage, gaze to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 5d5 
 damage, touch to poison you for 10d5 damage and insult to do you no effect.  
 It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

The Bronze golem  (Orange 'g')
=== Num:609  Lev:55  Rar:9  Spd:+10  Hp:2800  Ac:170  Exp:120000
A gigantic four-armed animated bronze statue of demonic shape, glowing with
 great heat.  This demon is normally found on dungeon level 55 and moves
 quickly, but is larger, faster or more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 709090.91 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It may breathe fire; 1
 time in 6 and is also magical, casting spells which produce lightning balls, 
 produce fire balls, produce plasma bolts, teleport to or summon a demon; 1
 time in 6.  It can open doors and bash down doors.  It is cold blooded.  It is
 not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, poison and 
 edged weapons.  It resists magical spells, the effects of rods, staffs and
 wands and blunt weapons.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.
It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It may carry
 one or two precious metals.  It can hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage, hit to 
 hurt you for 10d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage and hit to hurt 
 you for 10d10 damage.  

[U] Evil Iggy  (Light Violet 'p')
=== Num:1158  Lev:55  Rar:8  Spd:+20  Hp:4550  Ac:180  Exp:150000
You have tales of him from a previous generation, but shouldn't he be in the
 mines of Moria?  Old-timers speak of this pest with both loathing and fondness,
 cursing his name with a smile on their face as they reminisce about battling
 this nuisance.  This evil man is normally found on dungeon level 55 and moves
 very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 886363.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He is magical, casting
 spells intelligently which produce plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, produce
 nether bolts, produce water bolts, produce mana bolts, blink-self, 
 teleport-self to, teleport to, create traps, cause mind blasting, summon an
 undead or summon Greater Undead; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors, bash down
 doors and pick up objects.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and 
 poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant of
 intruders, which he may notice from 400 feet.  He may carry up to 9 good 
 weapons, armours, garments, lites, adornments, written items, potions or 
 edible items.  He can touch to reduce strength and size from you for 6d8 
 damage, hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 10d10 damage, hit to 
 blind you for 10d10 damage, doubled against eye monsters and touch to steal 
 items from you for 6d8 damage.  

[U] the Master of Earth  (Umber 'E')
=== Num:466  Lev:55  Rar:9  Spd:+0  Hp:2257  Ac:97  Exp:160000
A towering stone elemental master stands before you.  The walls and ceiling are
 reduced to rubble as it advances.  This creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 55 and moves at normal speed.  Destroying this creature is worth
 945454.55 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native
 depth.  It may throw a boulder at to hurt you for 35d10 damage and may create
 earthquakes; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 acid balls, produce acid bolts, recover mana or summon monsters of the same
 group; 1 time in 5.  It can pass through walls and dig through earth and rubble
 .  It is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is hurt by rock
 remover.  It is immune to lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It
 resists blindness.  It cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 100 feet.  It
 usually appears with escorts.  It can hit to batter you for 9d6 damage, hit to
batter you for 9d6 damage and hit to shatter you for 10d10 damage.  

[U] Fluithuin the Ogress, Consort of Morgoth  (Violet 'O')
=== Num:585  Lev:56  Rar:8  Spd:+20  Hp:3816  Ac:140  Exp:120000
A powerful, fierce ogress, consort to Morgoth.  This evil giant is normally
 found on dungeon level 56 and moves a bit erratically and very quickly.  
 Killing this creature is worth 720000.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 She is deadly at her native depth.  She may throw a boulder at to hurt you for
 35d10 damage; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting spells which produce
 acid balls, produce water balls, produce ice bolts or produce water bolts; 1
 time in 5.  She can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  She is immune to acid, fire, cold
 and poison.  She takes quite a while to see intruders, which she may notice
 from 400 feet.  She may carry up to 3 good chests, weapons, armours, garments, 
 tools, edible items or junk items.  She can hit to batter you for 11d10 damage
 , hit to batter you for 11d10 damage and hit to shatter you for 11d10 damage.  
 

[U] Saruman of Many Colours  (Violet 'M')
=== Num:532  Lev:56  Rar:8  Spd:+20  Hp:5600  Ac:100  Exp:130000
Originally known as the White, Saruman fell prey to Sauron's wiles.  He seeks
 to emulate him and breeds orcs and trolls to fight for him.  He searches
 forever for the One Ring, to become a mighty Sorcerer-King of the world.  This
 evil elf mage is normally found on dungeon level 56 and moves very quickly.  
 Killing this creature is worth 780000.00 points for a 1st level character.  He
 is over powered at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce acid balls, produce fire balls, produce frost balls
 , invoke darkness storms, invoke mana storms, produce water balls, produce
 plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, haste-self, recover mana, heal-self, 
 cure-self, teleport-self, teleport away, create traps, cause mind blasting, 
 summon monsters, summon Ancient Dragons, summon Greater Demons, summon Greater
 Undead, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time in 1.  He can open
 doors and bash down doors.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire and cold.  
 He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders,
 which he may notice from 600 feet.  He may carry up to 6 good weapons, armours
 or written items.  He can hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d8 
 damage, hit to drain mana from you for 6d8 damage, plus spell points, hit to 
 remove enchantments from you for 5d5 damage and hit to remove enchantments from
you for 5d5 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  
 

[U] Glaurung, Father of the Dragons  (Light Red 'A')
=== Num:481  Lev:56  Rar:7  Spd:+20  Hp:5400  Ac:140  Exp:150000
Glaurung is the father of all dragons, and was for a long time the most
 powerful.  Though this is no longer so, he still has full command over his
 brood and can command them to appear whenever he so wishes.  He is the
 definition of dragonfire.  This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level
 56 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 900000.00 points
 for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native depth.  He may breathe 
 fire or poison powerfully; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which summon Ancient Dragons, terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2.  He can bash down
 doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  He
 is immune to fire and poison.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He
 tends to overlook intruders, which he may notice from 300 feet.  He may carry
 up to 7 exceptional chests, armours or adornments.  He can claw to hurt you 
 for 5d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 5d12 damage, bite to hurt and poison you
for 8d14 damage and bite to burn you for 8d14 damage.  

The Great Wyrm of Elements  (Light Green 'A')
=== Num:708  Lev:56  Rar:9  Spd:+10  Hp:3500  Ac:170  Exp:150000
A massive dragon, one of the mightiest of dragonkind.  It has powerful
 understanding of the flow of elemental forces.  It has travelled from the
 elemental planes to destroy you.  This evil dragon is normally found on
 dungeon level 56 and moves quickly.  A kill of this creature is worth
 900000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native
 depth.   and may breathe fire, poison, shards or force powerfully; 1 time in 3
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which summon a dragon, 
 summon Ancient Dragons, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can bash down doors, fly over
 obstacles and track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to 
 acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It cannot be confused, charmed, slept
 or cut.  It prefers to ignore intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  
 It may carry up to 7 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can claw to wound
you for 5d12 damage, claw to wound you for 5d12 damage and bite to impact you 
 with force for 7d12 damage.  

The Diamond golem  (White 'g')
=== Num:1164  Lev:56  Rar:9  Spd:+15  Hp:2870  Ac:275  Exp:150000
A gigantic animated diamond statue of demonic shape.  This demon is normally
 found on dungeon level 56 and moves very quickly, but is larger, faster or 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth
 900000.00 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire or mana; 1 time in 5 and is also magical, casting
 spells which produce shard balls, invoke mana storms, produce mana bolts, 
 teleport to or cause mind blasting; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors.  It
 is cold blooded.  It is not detected by telepathy.  It is immune to acid, 
 lightning, fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  It resists magical spells
 and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be stunned, frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may
 notice from 200 feet.  It may carry up to 5 gem stones.  It can hit to hurt 
 you for 10d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage, hit to hurt you for
 10d10 damage and hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage.  

The Horned Reaper  (Light Blue 'U')
=== Num:571  Lev:56  Rar:9  Spd:+20  Hp:2888  Ac:120  Exp:160000
A giant humanoid demon wielding a massive, heavy and sharp scythe.  Feared by
 foes and friends alike when it flies into one of its berserk rages, the Horned
 Reaper will cut down anything in its path between it and you - even the minions
 it has just summoned.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 56
 and moves very quickly, but is more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  
 Destruction of this creature is worth 960000.00 points for a 1st level
 character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It is magical, casting
 spells which haste-self, incur beserk rage, summon Greater Demons, terrify or 
 slow powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 5.  It can open
 doors, bash down doors and can eat bodies to regain strength.  It regenerates
 quickly.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 magical spells and the effects of rods, staffs and wands.  It cannot be 
 confused, charmed or slept.  It pays little attention to intruders, which it
 may notice from 400 feet.  It may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or 
 written items.  It can hit to hurt you for 11d11 damage, hit to hurt you for
 11d11 damage, hit to hurt you for 11d11 damage and hit to hurt you for 11d11 
 damage.  

The Archlich|||es|  (Light Blue 'L')
=== Num:558  Lev:57  Rar:10  Spd:+10  Hp:3040  Ac:120  Exp:160000
A lich who has reached its ultimate evolutionary stage:  a completely
 immaterial state.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon
 level 57 and moves quickly, but is more powerful or specialised deeper in the
 dungeon.  Destruction of this creature is worth 974545.45 points for a 1st
 level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It is magical,
 casting spells intelligently which produce nether balls, heal-self, blink-self
 , teleport-self, teleport to, drain mana, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, 
 give resistance to the elements, summon a demon, summon Greater Undead, cause
 amnesia, terrify or paralyze; 1 time in 3.  It can open doors, bash down doors
 and pass through walls.  It is cold blooded.  It is immune to lightning, cold
 and poison.  It resists blunt weapons.  It cannot be confused, charmed or 
 slept.  It tends to overlook intruders, which it may notice from 200 feet.  It
 may carry up to 7 good garments, adornments, magical devices or written items.
It can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you, touch to drain charges
 from your wands and staffs, touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for
 8d12 damage and touch to reduce dexterity and agility from you for 8d12 damage
 .  

[U] Denethor, Steward of Gondor  (Light Teal 't')
=== Num:1085  Lev:57  Rar:9  Spd:+20  Hp:3850  Ac:160  Exp:250000
The proud 'king' of Gondor, he has been driven mad by his contact with Sauron
 through the palantir, and by the death of his sons.  You see the glint of a
 terrible fire in his eyes.  This man warrior mage is normally found on dungeon
 level 57 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1522727.27
 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He
 is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce fire balls, produce
 fire bolts, produce plasma bolts, produce mana bolts, haste-self, heal-self, 
 teleport-self, teleport to, teleport away, create traps, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds, summon similar monsters, summon monsters of the same class, 
 cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 1.  He can carry a lite to see you, open doors, bash
 down doors and pick up objects.  He needs lite to see you.  He is immune to 
 acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He resists plasma.  He is fairly
 observant of intruders, which he may notice from 400 feet.  He usually appears
 with escorts.  He may carry up to 7 good weapons, garments, tools, lites, 
 adornments, musical items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to burn you 
 for 9d12 damage, hit to burn you for 4d6 damage, hit to wound you for 10d10 
 damage and hit to wound you for 10d10 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian,
 impeding your progress further.  

[U] Gandalf the White  (White 'M')
=== Num:513  Lev:57  Rar:10  Spd:+20  Hp:5250  Ac:180  Exp:270000
The wizard who opposed Saruman, and in the end, was the only one of the Istari
 to succeed in his task. Gandalf is very wise and specializes in fire magic.  
 This elf is normally found on dungeon level 57 and moves very quickly.  
 Killing this creature is worth 1644545.45 points for a 1st level character.  
 He is over powered at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce fire balls, produce fire bolts, produce plasma
 bolts, produce mana bolts, haste-self, heal-self, teleport-self, teleport to, 
 teleport away, create darkness, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, create a
 shield, summon similar monsters, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 1.  He can open doors
 , bash down doors and pick up objects.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 400 feet.  He may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or written items.  
 He can hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 6d8 damage, hit to burn 
 you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage and hit to hurt you for
 10d10 damage.  

[U] Kronos, Lord of the Titans  (Light Pink 'P')
=== Num:587  Lev:57  Rar:12  Spd:+10  Hp:4900  Ac:150  Exp:300000
The lord of the Titans, he has broken loose from his confinement in the nether
 hells to seek revenge on the world.  This evil giant is normally found on
 dungeon level 57 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1827272.73
 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He
 may breathe fire, frost, sound or shards; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which heal-self, teleport to, summon similar
 monsters or summon monsters; 1 time in 3.  He can bash down doors and pick up
 objects.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He cannot
 be stunned or cut.  He takes a while to see intruders, which he may notice
 from 300 feet.  He usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 7 good 
 chests, musical items, potions or edible items.  He can hit to batter you for
 12d12 damage, hit to batter you for 12d12 damage, hit to confuse you for 12d12 
 damage and hit to confuse you for 12d12 damage.  

[U] Alatar the Blue  (Light Blue 'M')
=== Num:510  Lev:57  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:4200  Ac:170  Exp:350000
Sent by Orome as one of the five Istari sent to Middle-earth by the Valar.  A
 powerful wizard, he traveled to the East with Saruman the White and his
 companion Pallando the Blue.  There he was ensnared by Sauron and became one of
 his servants, never returning to the West again.  This elf mage is normally
 found on dungeon level 57 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is
 worth 2131818.18 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his
 native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 nether balls, produce nether bolts, produce mana bolts, haste-self, heal-self, 
 teleport-self, teleport to, teleport away, create traps, cause mind blasting, 
 cause wounds, create a shield, summon similar monsters, summon monsters of the
 same class, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse powerfully enough to
 overcome your resistance; 1 time in 1.  He can open doors, bash down doors and 
 pick up objects.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He
 resists blunt weapons.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may
 notice from 400 feet.  He may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or written
 items.  He can touch to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you, hit to blind you
for 10d5 damage, doubled against eye monsters, hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage
 and hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage.  

[U] Palando the Blue  (Blue 'M')
=== Num:509  Lev:57  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:3850  Ac:160  Exp:370000
Sent by Orome as one of the five Istari sent to Middle-earth by the Valar.  A
 powerful wizard, he traveled to the East with Saruman the White and his
 companion Alatar the Blue.  There he was ensnared by Sauron and became one of
 his servants, never returning to the West again.  This elf mage is normally
 found on dungeon level 57 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is
 worth 2253636.36 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his
 native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce fire
 balls, produce fire bolts, produce plasma bolts, produce mana bolts, 
 haste-self, heal-self, teleport-self, teleport to, teleport away, create traps
 , cause mind blasting, cause wounds, create a shield, summon similar monsters, 
 summon monsters of the same class, cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 1.  He can open doors
 , bash down doors and pick up objects.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  He resists blunt weapons.  He is fairly observant of
 intruders, which he may notice from 400 feet.  He usually appears with a
 friend.  He may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or written items.  He can 
 hit to burn you for 9d12 damage, hit to burn you for 4d6 damage, hit to hurt 
 you for 10d10 damage and hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage.  

[U] 15-headed Hydra  (Light Violet 'y')
=== Num:1165  Lev:57  Rar:12  Spd:+25  Hp:4410  Ac:150  Exp:400000
A strange reptilian hybrid with fifteen heads.  This animal is normally found 
 on dungeon level 57 and moves incredibly quickly.  Killing this creature is
 worth 2436363.64 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its
 native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, frost, poison or plasma
 powerfully; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce acid balls, produce lightning balls, produce fire balls, produce
 frost balls, produce poison balls, produce storm balls, produce acid bolts, 
 produce lightning bolts, produce fire bolts, produce frost bolts, produce
 poison bolts, produce plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, produce lightening beams
 , summon similar monsters or terrify powerfully enough to overcome your
 resistance; 1 time in 2.  It can bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain
 strength and track you over land, but not through water.  It lights up the
 surroundings.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It
 resists lava, plasma and blindness.  It cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 500 feet.  It may
 carry up to 9 good treasures.  It can bite to hurt and poison you for 8d10 
 damage, bite to freeze you for 8d10 damage, bite to burn you for 10d6 damage
 and bite to electrify you for 10d6 damage.  

[U] Shelob, Spider of Darkness  (Purple 'S')
=== Num:530  Lev:58  Rar:12  Spd:+20  Hp:9100  Ac:160  Exp:180000
Shelob is an enormous bloated spider, the last daughter of Ungoliant the
 Unlight.  Her poison is legendary, as is her ego.  She normally guards the pass
 through Cirith Ungol, but occasionally goes out foraging for food to feed her
 voracious appetite.  This evil insect is normally found on dungeon level 58
 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1112727.27 points for
 a 1st level character.  She is over powered at her native depth.  She may
 breathe poison or darkness; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which invoke darkness storms, heal-self, create darkness, curse
 you, summon similar monsters, terrify, blind, confuse or slow; 1 time in 2.  
 She can bash down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.  She appears in a
 giant web.  She is hurt by bright light.  She is immune to acid and poison.  
 She resists darkness.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  She pays
 little attention to intruders, which she may notice from 400 feet.  She may
 carry up to 4 good garments or junk items.  She can claw to hurt and poison 
 you for 8d6 damage, claw to hurt and poison you for 8d6 damage, bite to 
 paralyze you for 8d10 damage and sting to reduce strength and size from you 
 for 8d4 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Carcharoth, the Jaws of Thirst  (Red 'C')
=== Num:544  Lev:58  Rar:10  Spd:+20  Hp:5600  Ac:160  Exp:200000
The first guard of Angband, Carcharoth, also known as 'The Red Maw', is the
 greatest wolf to ever walk the earth.  He is highly intelligent and a deadly
 opponent in combat.  This evil animal is normally found on dungeon level 58
 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1236363.64 points for
 a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He may
 breathe fire, poison, darkness or nether; 1 time in 3 and is also magical,
 casting spells intelligently which summon hounds; 1 time in 3.  He can bash
 down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly over
 land, but not through water.  He is immune to fire and poison.  He resists 
 nether and darkness.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is fairly
 observant of intruders, which he may notice from 500 feet.  He may carry up to
 4 good garments, edible items or junk items.  He can claw to burn you for 9d12 
 damage, claw to burn you for 9d12 damage, bite to burn you for 9d12 damage and 
 bite to burn you for 9d12 damage.  

[U] Huan, Wolfhound of the Valar  (Light Slate 'C')
=== Num:543  Lev:58  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:5600  Ac:160  Exp:210000
The wolfhound of the Valar, Huan has served many masters in his time, from
 Celegorm son of Feanor to Beren son of Barahir: but now he runs wild and
 acknowledges no master save himself, as he hunts alone for his nemesis -
 Carcharoth, the terrible wolf of Angband.  This animal is normally found on
 dungeon level 58 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth
 1298181.82 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native
 depth.  He may breathe frost, light, sound or shards; 1 time in 5.  He can 
 bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and track you unerringly
 over land, but not through water.  He is immune to acid, lightning and cold.  
 He resists lite.  He cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept
 or cut.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 500
 feet.  He may carry up to 4 good garments, edible items or junk items.  He can 
 claw to freeze you for 9d12 damage, claw to freeze you for 9d12 damage, bite 
 to freeze you for 9d12 damage and bite to freeze you for 9d12 damage.  

The Great Power Serpent  (Violet 'J')
=== Num:1166  Lev:58  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:4200  Ac:200  Exp:220000
The most powerful breed of serpent.  It appears to be every color at once.
 Nobody has survived long enough to know all the different ways it can breathe.
This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 58 and moves very quickly.  
 A kill of this creature is worth 1360000.00 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is over powered at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, 
 frost, poison, light, darkness, confusion, sound, chaos, disenchantment, nexus
 or nether powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which summon a dragon, summon Ancient Dragons, terrify, blind or 
 confuse powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 bash down doors and swim under water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  It resists nether, lava, plasma, nexus, disenchantment, lite
 , darkness and chaos.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed or slept.  It
 pays little attention to intruders, which it may notice from 400 feet.  It may
 carry up to 7 good garments, edible items or junk items.  It can claw to hurt 
 you for 8d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 8d12 damage, bite to hurt you for
 9d14 damage and bite to hurt you for 9d14 damage.  

[U] the Lord of the Paths of the Dead  (Light Purple 'G')
=== Num:522  Lev:58  Rar:12  Spd:+20  Hp:4550  Ac:150  Exp:280000
The mightiest of the oath breakers who lie in the Paths of the Dead.  His
 powerful blows and fell magic rain down on you, for you are not an heir of
 Isildur.  This evil undead creature is normally found on dungeon level 58 and
 moves very quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth 1730909.09 points for a
 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  ; 1 time in 2
 and is also magical, casting spells which invoke darkness storms, produce
 nether balls, summon similar monsters, summon Greater Undead, summon Ring
 Wraiths, blind, confuse or paralyze; 1 time in 2.  He can pass through walls
 and fly over obstacles.  He is cold blooded.  He is immune to cold, poison and 
 blunt weapons.  He cannot be stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  He is
 fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He may carry
 up to 7 good garments, tools, musical items or junk items.  He can hit to hurt
you for 10d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage and touch to reduce 
 strength and size from you for 8d6 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding
 your progress further.  

[U] Caradhras, the Mountain  (Violet 'P')
=== Num:586  Lev:58  Rar:12  Spd:+10  Hp:4200  Ac:160  Exp:380000
The greatest peak of the Misty Mountains, created by Morgoth to stop Orome's
 progress into the East.  Not even Gandalf was a match for its terrible
 strength. Turn back while you can!  This evil giant is normally found on
 dungeon level 58 and moves quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 2349090.91
 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native depth.  It
 may throw a boulder at to hurt you and may breathe wind; 1 time in 5 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce wind balls, produce
 storm balls or produce ice bolts; 1 time in 5.  It can bash down doors, bore
 through walls and pick up objects.  It is hurt by rock remover.  It is immune
 to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It takes a while to see intruders,
 which it may notice from 300 feet.  It may carry up to 4 good chests, musical
 items, potions or edible items.  It can hit to shatter you for 26d13 damage
 and hit to confuse you for 26d13 damage.  

[U] Lungorthin, the Balrog of White Fire  (Light Yellow 'U')
=== Num:540  Lev:58  Rar:10  Spd:+20  Hp:5250  Ac:125  Exp:460000
A massive form cloaked in flame.  Lungorthin stares balefully at you with eyes
 that smoulder red.  The dungeon floor where he stands is scorched by the heat
 of his body.  This evil demon is normally found on dungeon level 58 and moves
 very quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth 2843636.36 points for a 1st
 level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.   and may breathe 
 fire or plasma powerfully; 1 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells
 which summon Greater Demons, summon an undead, terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  He can open doors
 , bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  He is immune to fire, cold and 
 poison.  He resists lava, plasma, magical spells and the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He pays little
 attention to intruders, which he may notice from 200 feet.  He usually appears
 with escorts.  He may carry up to 7 good weapons, armours or written items.  
 He can hit to burn you for 18d12 damage, crush to hurt you for 12d12 damage
 and touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs.  

The Tarrasque  (Violet 'R')
=== Num:1167  Lev:59  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:5950  Ac:185  Exp:230000
A tarrasque is a massive reptile of legend, rumoured to be unkillable and
 immune to magic.  Fear its anger, for its devastation is unmatched!  This 
 animal is normally found on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly, but is 
 more powerful deeper in the dungeon.  A kill of this creature is worth
 1442727.27 points for a 1st level character.  It is over powered at its native
 depth.  It may breathe fire, frost or disenchantment powerfully; 1 time in 2.  
 It can open doors, bash down doors, can eat bodies to regain strength and 
 track you over land, but not through water.  It is immune to fire and cold.  
 It resists lava and disenchantment.  It cannot be stunned, confused, charmed
 or slept.  It takes a while to see intruders, which it may notice from 500
 feet.  It may carry up to 5 good garments or junk items.  It can hit to hurt 
 you for 10d10 damage, hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage, touch to drain charges
 from your wands and staffs and touch to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs.  

The Great wyrm of Power  (Light Blue 'A')
=== Num:1229  Lev:59  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:3870  Ac:70  Exp:270000
A gigantic wyrm, in command of forces elemental and ethereal.  You shudder as
 you turn to face an emperor of Dragons, a despot of Life and Death, and slowly
 realize that you have just encountered what might quite possibly be your doom.
This dragon is normally found on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly.  A
 kill of this creature is worth 1693636.36 points for a 1st level character.  
 It is over powered at its native depth.  It may breathe acid, lightning, fire, 
 frost, poison, plasma, light, darkness, confusion, sound, shards, inertia, 
 gravity, force, chaos, disenchantment, nexus, nether or time powerfully; 1
 time in 3 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which cause mind
 blasting, cause wounds, summon Ancient Dragons, blind, confuse, slow or 
 paralyze powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 3.  It can 
 bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but not through
 water.  It is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  It resists 
 nether, plasma, nexus, disenchantment, lite, darkness and chaos.  It cannot be 
 stunned, confused, charmed, slept or cut.  It pays very little attention to
 intruders, which it may notice from 250 feet.  It usually appears with
 escorts.  It may carry up to 9 good chests, armours or adornments.  It can 
 claw to wound you for 5d18 damage, claw to wound you for 5d18 damage and bite 
 to batter you for 6d18 damage.  

[U] Vampire-Sauron  (Light Purple 'V')
=== Num:1369  Lev:59  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:7350  Ac:160  Exp:290000
Sauron's form as a vampire, great as a dark cloud across the moon.  This evil
 undead creature is found on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 1819090.91 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 over powered at his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently
 which produce acid balls, produce fire balls, produce poison balls, invoke
 darkness storms, produce storm balls, produce plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, 
 produce mana bolts, produce nether beams, recover mana, heal-self, blink-self, 
 teleport-self, push through floor or ceiling, dispel enchantments on you, 
 cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon Greater Undead, cause amnesia, 
 terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors, bash down doors, 
 fly over obstacles and easily evade blows and missiles.  He regenerates
 quickly.  He is immune to acid, lightning, cold and poison.  He resists 
 blindness.  He cannot be stunned, frightened, confused, charmed, slept, slowed
 or paralyzed.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from
 1000 feet.  He can bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 6d12 
 damage, claw to terrify you for 8d12 damage, touch to drain charges from your
 wands and staffs and touch to drain health from you.  

[U] Serpent-Sauron  (Light Purple 'J')
=== Num:1368  Lev:59  Rar:22  Spd:+20  Hp:7350  Ac:160  Exp:310000
Sauron's form as a serpent: poisonous, biting, spitting, and threatening to
 crush you in its mighty coils.  This evil dragon is found on dungeon level 59
 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 1944545.45 points for
 a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He may spit 
 to dissolve you for 4d12 damage and may breathe acid, poison or chaos; 1 time
 in 1 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which recover mana, 
 heal-self, blink-self, teleport-self, push through floor or ceiling, dispel
 enchantments on you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon Ancient Dragons
 , cause amnesia, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 4.  He can open doors
 and bash down doors.  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune to acid, lightning
 , fire, cold, poison and edged weapons.  He resists blindness.  He cannot be 
 stunned, frightened, confused, slowed or paralyzed.  He is ever vigilant for
 intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.  He can bite to hurt and poison
you for 7d12 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 7d12 damage, crush to hurt
you for 8d12 damage and spit to dissolve you for 4d12 damage.  

[U] Sauron, the Sorcerer  (Light Purple 'q')
=== Num:546  Lev:59  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:7350  Ac:160  Exp:410000
He is Morgoth's most powerful servant.  Mighty in spells and enchantments, he
 created the One Ring.  His eyes glow with power and his gaze seeks to destroy
 your soul.  He has many servants, and rarely fights without them.  This evil 
 man is found on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly.  Killing this creature
 is worth 2571818.18 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at
 his native depth.  He is magical, casting spells intelligently which produce
 fire balls, invoke darkness storms, produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, 
 produce water balls, produce plasma bolts, produce ice bolts, produce mana
 bolts, heal-self, teleport-self, push through floor or ceiling, cause mind
 blasting, cause wounds, summon monsters, summon Ancient Dragons, summon
 Greater Demons, summon Unique Monsters, summon Greater Undead, summon Ring
 Wraiths, cause amnesia, terrify or blind; 1 time in 1.  He can open doors and 
 bash down doors.  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune to lightning, fire, 
 cold and poison.  He resists blindness.  He cannot be frightened, confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from
 1000 feet.  He may carry up to 7 exceptional weapons, garments, lites, 
 adornments, magical devices, written items, potions or edible items.  He can 
 hit to disenchant your armour and weapons for 10d12 damage, hit to drain mana
 from you for 10d12 damage, plus spell points, hit to drain charges from your
 wands and staffs for 8d12 damage and hit to drain charges from your wands and
 staffs for 8d12 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your progress
 further.  

[U] the Witch-King of Angmar, Lord of the Nazgul  (Light Violet 'W')
=== Num:535  Lev:59  Rar:7  Spd:+20  Hp:4560  Ac:120  Exp:420000
The Chief of the Ringwraiths.  A fell being of devastating power.  His spells
 are lethal and his combat blows crushingly hard.  He moves at speed, and
 commands legions of evil to do his bidding.  It is said that he is fated never
 to die by the hand of mortal man.  This evil undead creature is normally found 
 on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 2634545.45 points for a 1st level character.  He is deadly at his native
 depth.  ; 1 time in 1 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which 
 produce nether balls, produce mana bolts, produce nether beams, cure-self, 
 teleport away, curse you, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon similar
 monsters, summon monsters, summon Ancient Dragons, summon Greater Demons, 
 summon Greater Undead, summon Ring Wraiths, terrify, blind or paralyze; 1 time
 in 1.  He can open doors and bash down doors.  He is cold blooded.  He is hurt
 by bright light.  He is immune to cold and poison.  He cannot be confused, 
 charmed or slept.  He is fairly observant of intruders, which he may notice
 from 900 feet.  He may carry up to 7 exceptional weapons, armours, garments, 
 adornments, magical devices or potions.  He can hit to hurt you for 10d10 
 damage, hit to hurt you for 10d10 damage and hit to drain experience (by
 80d6+) from you for 7d7 damage.  It is a dungeon guardian, impeding your
 progress further.  

[U] Wolf-Sauron  (Light Purple 'C')
=== Num:1367  Lev:59  Rar:16  Spd:+30  Hp:7350  Ac:160  Exp:430000
Sauron's form as the mightiest wolf that had yet walked the world.  This evil 
 animal is found on dungeon level 59 and moves incredibly quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 2697272.73 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 over powered at his native depth.  He may breathe fire or nether; 1 time in 1
 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which invoke darkness storms
 , heal-self, blink-self, teleport-self, push through floor or ceiling, cause
 wounds, summon monsters, terrify, blind or confuse; 1 time in 3.  He can open
 doors and bash down doors.  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune to acid, 
 fire, cold and poison.  He resists blindness, magical spells and the effects
 of rods, staffs and wands.  He cannot be stunned, frightened, charmed, slept, 
 slowed or paralyzed.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice
 from 1000 feet.  He can bite to hurt and poison you for 6d10 damage, bite to 
 hurt and poison you for 6d10 damage, claw to confuse you for 4d8 damage and 
 claw to drain mana from you for 4d8 damage, plus spell points.  

[U] Ancalagon the Black  (Light Dark 'A')
=== Num:511  Lev:59  Rar:11  Spd:+20  Hp:7000  Ac:170  Exp:570000
"Rushing Jaws" is his name, and death is his game; the greatest and most
 terrible of all dragonkind, his power dismayed even the Valar for a time.  
 This evil dragon is normally found on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly.
Killing this creature is worth 3575454.55 points for a 1st level character.  He
 is over powered at his native depth.  He may breathe acid, lightning, fire, 
 frost or poison powerfully; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which summon similar monsters or summon Ancient Dragons; 1 time
 in 2.  He can bash down doors, fly over obstacles and track you over land, but
 not through water.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  
 He resists lava.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He tends to
 overlook intruders, which he may notice from 400 feet.  He usually appears
 with escorts.  He may carry up to 7 exceptional chests, armours or adornments.
He can claw to hurt you for 6d12 damage, claw to hurt you for 6d12 damage, bite
to hurt you for 10d14 damage and bite to hurt you for 10d14 damage.  It is a
 dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Gothmog, the High Captain of Balrogs  (Light Violet 'U')
=== Num:545  Lev:59  Rar:12  Spd:+20  Hp:5760  Ac:140  Exp:880000
Gothmog is the Chief Balrog in Morgoth's personal guard.  He is renowned for
 slaying Feanor and Fingon, two of the High Kings of the Noldor Elves, and has
 never been defeated in combat.  With his whip of flame and awesome fiery breath
 he saved his master from Ungoliant's rage.  This evil demon is normally found 
 on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly.  Destroying this creature is worth
 5520000.00 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native
 depth.  He may lash to burn you for 18d12 damage and may breathe fire or 
 plasma powerfully; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells which 
 summon Greater Demons, summon Greater Undead, terrify, blind or confuse
 powerfully enough to overcome your resistance; 1 time in 2.  He can open doors
 , bash down doors and fly over obstacles.  He is immune to acid, lightning, 
 fire and cold.  He resists plasma, magical spells and the effects of rods,
 staffs and wands.  He cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  He is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.  He usually
 appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 7 exceptional weapons, armours or 
 written items.  He can hit to hurt you for 19d12 damage, lash to burn you for
 18d12 damage and touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs.  It is a
 dungeon guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Giant-Sauron  (Light Purple 'P')
=== Num:1370  Lev:59  Rar:15  Spd:+20  Hp:7350  Ac:160  Exp:1900000
Sauron's form as a giant, a tall armoured impassive figure.  This evil mix of 
 man and giant is found on dungeon level 59 and moves very quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 11918181.82 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 over powered at his native depth.  He may create a crossbow bolt to drain 
 charges from your wands and staffs for 8d12 damage; 1 time in 2 and is also
 magical, casting spells intelligently which heal-self, teleport-self, cause
 mind blasting, cause wounds, summon monsters of the same class, summon giants, 
 cause amnesia, cause hallucinations, terrify or blind; 1 time in 2.  He can 
 open doors and bash down doors.  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune to 
 lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He resists blindness.  He cannot be stunned
 , frightened, confused, charmed, slept, cut, slowed or paralyzed.  He is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.  He can hit to 
 shatter you for 10d12 damage, hit to shatter you for 10d12 damage and hit to 
 drain charges from your wands and staffs for 8d12 damage.  

[U] Ungoliant, the Unlight  (Violet 'S')
=== Num:542  Lev:59  Rar:19  Spd:+20  Hp:11200  Ac:180  Exp:4600000
This enormous, hideous spirit of void is in the form of a spider of immense
 proportions.  She is surrounded by a cloud of Unlight as she sucks in all
 living light into her bloated body.  She is always ravenously hungry and would
 even eat herself to avoid starvation.  She is rumoured to have a foul and
 deadly breath.  This evil insect is normally found on dungeon level 59 and
 moves very quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 28854545.45 points for a
 1st level character.  She is over powered at her native depth.   and may
 breathe poison or darkness; 1 time in 1 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce fire balls, invoke darkness storms, produce nether
 balls, invoke mana storms, produce mana bolts, teleport-self, cause mind
 blasting, cause wounds, summon similar monsters, summon monsters, summon
 Greater Demons, summon Greater Undead, terrify or blind; 1 time in 1.  She can 
 open doors, bash down doors and climb on walls and ceilings.  She is cold
 blooded.  She appears in a giant web.  She is immune to lightning, fire, cold
 and poison.  She resists darkness.  She cannot be confused, charmed or slept.  
 She is ever vigilant for intruders, which she may notice from 1000 feet.  She
 usually appears with escorts.  She may carry up to 7 exceptional garments or 
 junk items.  She can bite to drain experience (by 80d6+) from you for 7d12 
 damage, bite to hurt and poison you for 7d12 damage and sting to drain charges
 from your wands and staffs for 7d12 damage.  

[U] Eye-Sauron  (Light Purple 'e')
=== Num:1371  Lev:59  Rar:18  Spd:+10  Hp:7350  Ac:160  Exp:4900000
Sauron's form as a giant lidless flaming eye, surrounded by lightning, endless
 searching for you.  This evil demon is found on dungeon level 59 and moves
 quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 30736363.64 points for a 1st level
 character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He may gaze to disenchant
your armour and weapons for 10d12 damage or gaze to drain charges from your
 wands and staffs for 8d12 damage and may breathe lightning, fire or plasma; 1
 time in 1 and is also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce fire
 balls, invoke darkness storms, produce nether balls, produce plasma bolts, 
 produce lightening beams, recover mana, heal-self, teleport-self, push through
 floor or ceiling, cause mind blasting, cause wounds, summon Greater Demons, 
 cause amnesia, terrify or blind; 1 time in 1.  He can open doors and bash down
 doors.  He lights up the surroundings.  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune
 to acid, lightning, fire, poison and blunt weapons.  He cannot be stunned, 
 frightened, confused, charmed, slept, cut, slowed or paralyzed.  He is ever
 vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.  He can gaze to 
 disenchant your armour and weapons for 10d12 damage and gaze to drain charges
 from your wands and staffs for 8d12 damage.  

[U] Morgoth, Lord of Darkness  (Light Dark 'M')
=== Num:547  Lev:60  Rar:26  Spd:+30  Hp:14000  Ac:150  Exp:4100000
He is the Master of the Pits of Angband.  His figure is like a black mountain
 crowned with lightning.  He rages with everlasting anger, his body scarred by
 Fingolfin's eight mighty wounds.  He can never rest from his pain, but seeks
 forever to dominate all that is light and good in the world.  He is the origin
 of man's fear of darkness and created many foul creatures with his evil powers.
 Orcs, Dragons, and Trolls are his most foul corruptions, causing much pain and
 suffering in the world to please him.  His disgusting visage, twisted with
 evil, is crowned with iron, the two remaining Silmarils forever burning him. 
 Grond, the mighty Hammer of the Underworld, cries defiance as he strides
 towards you to crush you to a pulp!  This evil elf is found on dungeon level 60
 and moves incredibly quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 26090909.09
 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He
 may create earthquakes; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, produce mana
 bolts, incur wraithform, curse you, cause mind blasting, summon similar
 monsters, summon monsters, summon Ancient Dragons, summon Greater Demons, 
 summon Unique Monsters, summon Greater Undead or summon Ring Wraiths; 1 time
 in 2.  He can bore through walls.  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune to 
 acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  He resists blindness.  He cannot be 
 frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders,
 which he may notice from 1000 feet.  He may carry up to 9 exceptional weapons, 
 armours or written items.  He can hit to shatter you for 20d10 damage, hit to 
 shatter you for 20d10 damage, hit to reduce all stats from you for 10d12 
 damage and touch to drain charges from your wands and staffs.  It is a dungeon
 guardian, impeding your progress further.  

[U] Morgoth, Lord of Darkness  (Light Dark 'M')
=== Num:715  Lev:60  Rar:25  Spd:+30  Hp:14000  Ac:150  Exp:4100000
He is the Master of the Pits of Angband.  His figure is like a black mountain
 crowned with lightning.  He rages with everlasting anger, his body scarred by
 Fingolfin's eight mighty wounds.  He can never rest from his pain, but seeks
 forever to dominate all that is light and good in the world.  He is the origin
 of man's fear of darkness and created many foul creatures with his evil powers.
 Orcs, Dragons, and Trolls are his most foul corruptions, causing much pain and
 suffering in the world to please him.  His disgusting visage, twisted with
 evil, is crowned with iron, the two remaining Silmarils forever burning him. 
 Grond, the mighty Hammer of the Underworld, cries defiance as he strides
 towards you to crush you to a pulp!  This evil elf is found on dungeon level 60
 and moves incredibly quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 26090909.09
 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He
 may create earthquakes; 1 time in 2 and is also magical, casting spells
 intelligently which produce nether balls, invoke mana storms, produce mana
 bolts, cause mind blasting, summon monsters, summon Unique Monsters, summon
 Greater Undead or summon Ring Wraiths; 1 time in 2.  He can bore through walls
 .  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and 
 poison.  He resists blindness.  He cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or 
 slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.
He may carry up to 9 exceptional weapons, armours or written items.  He can hit
to shatter you for 20d10 damage, hit to shatter you for 20d10 damage, hit to 
 reduce all stats from you for 10d12 damage and touch to drain charges from 
 your wands and staffs.  

[U] Melkor, Song of Ruin  (Violet 'M')
=== Num:716  Lev:60  Rar:31  Spd:+40  Hp:14000  Ac:100  Exp:4100000
He is Melkor of the original song.  His figure is like a many colour harp
 vibrating with thunder.  He sings with unending temptation, his soul corrupting
 all around him.  He can never turn from his purpose, but seeks forever to draw
 to him all that is light and good in the world, like moths to a candle.  He is
 the origin of all that is imperfect twisting the natural creatures of the world
 to demonic and unnatural forms. The fallen Maia are his most tragic companions,
 causing inadvertent anguish and trembling to forgotten dreams.  His beautiful
 visage,  smiling and simple, is crowned with silver, the socket where the third
 Silmaril would be forever haunting him. Grond, the mighty Hammer of the
 Underworld, sings defiance as he strides towards you to tear you apart!  This
 evil elf is found on dungeon level 60 and moves incredibly quickly.  Killing
 this creature is worth 26090909.09 points for a 1st level character.  He is 
 over powered at his native depth.  He may breathe sound; 1 time in 2 and is
 also magical, casting spells intelligently which produce nether beams, produce
 cone of hellfire, blink-self, curse you, summon similar monsters, summon
 Greater Demons, raise Unique Monsters from the dead or summon Ring Wraiths; 1
 time in 2.  He can fly over obstacles and easily evade blows and missiles.  He
 regenerates quickly.  He is immune to acid, lightning, fire, cold and poison.  
 He resists blindness.  He cannot be frightened, confused, charmed or slept.  
 He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may notice from 1000 feet.  He
 usually appears with escorts.  He may carry up to 9 exceptional weapons, 
 armours or written items.  He can hit to drain health from you for 20d10 
 damage, hit to drain health from you for 20d10 damage, hit to drain mana from 
 you for 10d12 damage, plus spell points and touch to reduce all stats from you
 .  

[U] Morgoth, Despair of Arda  (Light Dark 'M')
=== Num:717  Lev:60  Rar:21  Spd:+30  Hp:14000  Ac:150  Exp:4100000
He is the Despair of the world of Arda.  His figure is like a swirling vortex
 twisting into nothing.  He hates life with everlasting malice, his mind vaulted
 with every memory since the dawn of time.  He can never forgive or forget, but
 seeks forver to destroy all that is light and good in the world. He is the
 final solution to man's hopes and aspirations and has taken much that was good
 and true and ground it to blood and dust.  He will use anything in his grasp to
 unmake the world and let him rest. His unspeakable expression, rigid in hatred,
 is crowned with steel, the two remaining Silmarils forever tormenting him. 
 Grond, the mighty Hammer of the Underworld, weeps defiance as he strides
 towards you to crush you to a pulp!  This evil elf is found on dungeon level 60
 and moves incredibly quickly.  Killing this creature is worth 26090909.09
 points for a 1st level character.  He is over powered at his native depth.  He
 is magical, casting spells intelligently which invoke mana storms, produce
 water balls, produce mana bolts, incur wraithform, curse you, cause mind
 blasting, summon Ancient Dragons or summon Ring Wraiths; 1 time in 2.  He can 
 swim under water.  He regenerates quickly.  He is immune to acid, lightning, 
 fire, cold and poison.  He resists blindness.  He cannot be frightened, 
 confused, charmed or slept.  He is ever vigilant for intruders, which he may
 notice from 1000 feet.  He may carry up to 9 exceptional weapons, armours or 
 written items.  He can hit to wound you for 20d10 damage, hit to batter you 
 for 20d10 damage and hit to reduce all stats from you for 10d12 damage.  

